New York Times Bestselling Author of
THE REASON FOR GOD and THE PRODIGAL GOD
TIMOTHYKELLER
with Katherine Leary Alsdorf
Connecting Your Work
to God's Work.
Every GoopEndeavor
Every Good Endeavor
ALSO BY TIMOTHY KELLER
THE REASON FOR GOD: Belief in an Age of Skepticism
THE PRODIGAL GOD: Recovering the Heart
of the Christian Faith COUNTERFEIT GODS: The Empty Promises
of Money, Sex,
and Power, and the Only Hope That Matters GENEROUS
JUSTICE: How God’s Grace Makes Us Just
KING’S CROSS: The Story of the World in the Life of Jesus THE
MEANING OF MARRIAGE: Facing the Complexities
of Commitment with the Wisdom of God
Every Good
Endeavor
Connecting Your Work
to God’s Work
TIMOTHY KELLER
with Katherine Leary Alsdorf
DUTTON
DUTTON
Published by Penguin Group (USA) Inc.
375 Hudson Street, New York, New York 10014, USA Penguin Group (Canada),
90 Eglinton Avenue East, Suite 700, Toronto, Ontario M4P 2Y3,
Canada (a division ofPearson Penguin Canada Inc.); Penguin Books Ltd, 80
Strand, London
WC2R 0RL, England; Penguin Ireland, 25 St Stephen’s Green, Dublin 2, Ireland
(a division of
Penguin Books Ltd); Penguin Group (Australia), 707 Collins St., Melbourne,
Victoria 3008,
Australia (a division ofPearson Australia Group Pty Ltd); Penguin Books India
Pvt Ltd, 11
Community Centre, Panchsheel Park, New Delhi–110 017, India; Penguin Group
(NZ),
67 Apollo Drive, Rosedale, Auckland 0632, New Zealand (a division ofPearson
New Zealand Ltd);
Penguin Books, Rosebank Office Park, 181 Jan Smuts Avenue, Parktown North
2193,
South Africa; Penguin China, B7 Jaiming Center, 27 East Third Ring Road North,
Chaoyang District, Beijing 100020, China Penguin Books Ltd, Registered Offices:
80 Strand, London WC2R 0RL, England Published by Dutton, a member of
Penguin Group (USA) Inc.
First printing, November 2012
1 3 5 7 9 10 8 6 4 2
Copyright © 2012 by Redeemer City to City, Redeemer Presbyterian Church, and
Timothy Keller All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced,
scanned, or distributed in any
printed or electronic form without permission. Please do not participate in or
encourage piracy of
copyrighted materials in violation of the author’s rights. Purchase only authorized
editions.
Some names and identifying characteristics have been changed to protect the privacy
of the
individuals involved.
All Bible references are from the New International Version (NIV), except where
noted.
Figure on page 250 copyright © Redeemer Presbyterian Church REGISTERED
TRADEMARK—MARCA REGISTRADA LIBRARY OF CONGRESS
CATALOGING-IN-PUBLICATION DATA
has been applied for.
ISBN: 978-1-101-60033-7
Printed in the United States of America Set in ITC Galliard Std.
Designed by Leonard Telesca
While the author has made every effort to provide accurate telephone numbers,
Internet addresses,
and other contact information at the time of publication, neither the publisher nor
the author
assumes any responsibility for errors or for changes that occur after publication.
Further, publisher
does not have any control over and does not assume any responsibility for author or
third-party
websites or their content.
ALWAYS LEARNING PEARSON
To the staf and volunteer leaders of Redeemer’s Center for
Faith & Work, who have helped our congregation see that
the gospel really does change everything.
CONTENTS
Foreword by Katherine Leary Alsdorf
Introduction
PART ONE
God’s Plan for Work
ONE
The Design of Work
TWO
The Dignity of Work
THREE Work as Cultivation
FOURWork as Service
PART TWO
Our Problems with Work
FIVE
Work Becomes Fruitless
SIXWork Becomes Pointless
SEVEN Work Becomes Selfish
EIGHT Work Reveals Our Idols
PART THREE
The Gospel and Work
NINE
A New Story for Work
TEN
A New Conception of Work
ELEVEN
A New Compass for Work
TWELVE
New Power for Work
Epilogue: Leading People to Integrate Faith and Work
Notes
Acknowledgments
During the year 1957, I experienced, by the grace
of God, a spiritual awakening which was to lead
me to a richer, fuller, more productive life. At
that time, in gratitude, I humbly asked to be
given the means and privilege to make others
happy through music. I feel this has been
granted through His grace. ALL PRAISE TO
GOD. . . .
This albumis a humble offering to Him. An
attempt to say “THANK YOU GOD” through
our work, even as we do in our hearts and with
our tongues. May He help and strengthen all
men in every good endeavor. —John Coltrane, excerpt, liner notes to A Love
Supreme
I
FOREWORD
n 1989 a colleague prodded me to come to her church—a
start-up in Manhattan called Redeemer Presbyterian Church.
I had been thoroughly inoculated against church years
before, having determined that the religion of my family’s
church was more formthan substance and that any leanings I
might have had in that direction were easily overcome by
enlightened thinking. But Redeemer caught my attention in a
few ways: The pastor was intelligent and talked like a normal
person, he seemed to take the Bible seriously, and he tried to
apply it to parts of life that were important to me—like my work.
A few years later I decided it was time to commit to faith
and “give my life” to the truth and promises of the Bible. I was
worried, I admit, that this commitment might put an end to my
career ambitions and material comforts because, in fact, two of
my brothers who had become Christians had been “called” to
be missionaries overseas. One lived in rural Africa without
running water or electricity. If I was going to really put God
first I had to be open to himcalling me to serve himanywhere.
And he did. A few weeks after my decision, I was stunned by
the sudden illness of my boss, the CEO—and his request that I
take over leadership of the company. Given the circumstances,
I took it as an indication fromGod that he wanted me to play
my part not in the third world but in the world of business.
For the next decade, I served in executive leadership in
several entrepreneurial tech companies in New York City,
Europe, and Silicon Valley. In each job and each day I wrestled
with what it means to be “called to serve God” as a leader in
business. Redeemer and its senior pastor, TimKeller, had given
me good grounding. I’d learned that I was supposed to be
changed by the gospel of Jesus Christ and therefore be “used
by God” in my relationships with others, and maybe even be
distinctive in the way I led companies. Nice concepts, but what
did they look like in practice?
The models were few and often seemed remnants of an age
when most of America went to church. One CEO would share
that he kept a Bible on his desk and that occasionally someone
in the company would ask about it. Another prayed and the
company thrived. Many viewed their corporate jobs primarily
as a means to make lots of money to give away to charities and
organizations they cared about. When I asked pastors and
businesspeople how their faith related to their work, they often
answered that a Christian’s primary, if not sole, mission in the
workplace was to evangelize those with whomthey worked.
But most businesspeople would quickly add that evangelism
was not one of their gifts. And none of these approaches
addressed the issue of how Christians’ faith should affect the
way they worked.
The start-up tech world, especially in the 1990s, was rather
full of itself. Entrepreneurs and engineers were viewed as gods
in our culture, and technology was the answer to all the
world’s problems. My employees had more evangelical fervor
about the vision (and technologies) of the company than the
people in any church I’d ever seen. And the hope of an IPO
was far more tangible and motivational than the ethereal
imaginings of heaven as portrayed by the Christian world.
Much of the time I worked with really good people—mature,
admirable people of character who worked hard to contribute
significantly to the world and who didn’t seemto need church
or the Jesus of the Bible to do it. I learned great lessons about
joy at work, patience and hope, teamwork and truth telling,
frompeople who didn’t share my faith. My staff who went
away for a meditation weekend seemed to come back more
refreshed than those who worshipped together on Sunday at a
Christian evangelical church. I started to see my work more as a
crucible where God was pounding and grinding and refining
me, rather than as a place where I was actively and effectively
serving him.
I believed in the truth of the gospel—that God created all
things and created man in his image and then sent his Son to
redeemall things that had been broken. And I believed God
had a purpose for me as a worker and leader, along with many
other people who could make a positive difference in the world.
But in the competitive, win-at-all-costs workplace where I had
to manage and lead, I had no idea how to live out God’s plan.
Outside of Redeemer, the churches I found didn’t seemto
offer much guidance on how I should do this. Most pastors
were more concerned about helping us serve inside the church
than about discipling and equipping us to serve in the world.
In the boomtimes of Silicon Valley in the late 1990s, many
congregations seemed oblivious to any brokenness in the
world or in themselves. Many who cared deeply about the poor
didn’t think about how the systems, structures, and cultures of
our industries might actually be contributing to the fractures in
our culture. Living out my faith in my work seemed relegated to
smallsymbolic gestures, to self-righteous abstinence from
certain behaviors, and to political alignments on the top
cultural and legal issues of the day.
The last company I led provided a remarkable leadership
experience. I took over fromthe founder, who had wooed most
of the staff and early customers to a wonderful vision of
product innovation and IPO riches. In early 2000 we were being
fought over by investment banks that courted us with potential
IPO valuations of 200 to 350 million dollars. We didn’t yet have
products, but several were in beta mode with early adopters.
My job was to win the trust of the staff, investors, and
customers, while rolling out products that delivered on our
promises and raising new money to get us to break even. There
was pressure every day to make progress in all these areas. In
the process I thought desperately about how the gospel
should enter into all this. Here are some of the observations I
made at the time:
• The gospel assures me that God cares about everything I
do and will listen to my prayers. He may not answer them
the way I want, but if he doesn’t it is because he knows
things I do not. My degree of success or failure is part of
his good plan for me. God is my source of strength and
perseverance.
• The gospel reminds us that God cares about the products
we make, the companies we work for, and the customers
we serve. He not only loves us, but also loves the world
and wants us to serve it well. My work is a critical way in
which God is caring for human beings and renewing his
world. God gives us our vision and our hope.
• The gospel is good news. In the words of pastor and
counselor Jack Miller, “Cheer up: You’re a worse sinner
than you ever dared imagine, and you’re more loved than
you ever dared hope.”
1
In other words, I will continually
err and sin, and yet God will prevail in my life through his
goodness and grace.
• The gospel gives meaning to our work as leaders. We’re
supposed to treat all people and their work with dignity.
We’re to create an environment in which people can
flourish and use their God-given gifts to contribute to
society. We’re to embody grace, truth, hope, and love in
the organizations we create.
• We’re to express our relationship with God and his grace
to us in the way we speak, work, and lead, not as perfect
exemplars but as pointers to Christ.
After eighteen months of relentless work, the company
failed. We were part of the Internet bubble, and when it burst, it
took us with it. While we got our product to market on
schedule, we couldn’t raise the additional money we needed
after venture capital dried up. We retained bankers to shop for
a buyer that would enable us to at least keep the product
going, keep some of the staff working, and provide some return
to our investors. However, the fears in the market scared off
the buyer we had been courting just days before signing the
deal. I had to lay off a hundred people the next day and then
sell off our intellectual property.
How could all this good, hard work go so wrong? My
questions and protests to God were on a personal, company,
and industry level. Why didn’t God enable our success when
he so clearly had “called” me to this job? I had tried to do right
by our employees, and now they were out of work in a
collapsed market. I wondered if I had fed into this Internet
“bubble and bust” with our company’s own vision of
skyrocketing revenues and valuations. What were my
responsibilities to all our stakeholders, including the culture at
large? The only Christian businesspeople I’d heard speak were
those who gave God credit for their big successes; how was I
to handle a failure? I wanted a gospel that had good news even
for this.
An amazing thing happened when I announced that the
next day would be our last day, although it took me some time
to fully appreciate the full beauty and gift of it. The staff,
entirely on their own, made a plan to come in the following day —for no pay—to celebrate one another and the work they had
done. Though the celebration was bittersweet, they brought in
musical instruments to play for one another or demonstrated
the tai chi they taught in the evenings, and they laughed about
fun times together. I was amazed. They were honoring a
culture, an organization, in which they’d found some joy in
their work and in their relationships with one another—despite
the end result. Eventually I came to see that day as a glimpse of
God at work, doing what God does: healing and renewing and
redeeming.
I suppose it could be called poetic justice that the response
to all my disillusionment about the lack of support from
churches was that sixmonths later, Redeemer Presbyterian
Church invited me to move back to New York to help themstart
a ministry for people in the marketplace. After a decade of
wrestling with God, pondering the transformational power of
the gospel, and complaining about the lack of guidance and
support fromthe church regarding work, I was being given a
chance to help others better live out the hope and truth of the
gospel in their vocational callings.
This book captures some foundational ways of thinking
about God, Jesus, the Holy Spirit; who we are in relation to that
Trinity; and how all this affects the work we were created to do.
How we work—in the context of our particular culture, time in
history, vocation, and organization—is something we all need
to be thinking through in our own communities. But the
answers will all hang on this essential theology: the knowledge
of who God is, his relation to man, his plan for the world, and
how the good news (or gospel) of Christ turns our lives and
the way we work upside down.
I’mgrateful to TimKeller for the way he’s applied the
gospel to our work lives over the course of his preaching and
leading in the last twenty-five years. And I’mgrateful that he’s
taken the time to put these foundations into print in this book,
so that all of us can dig more deeply into how God is calling us
to live faithfully as we work.
Katherine Leary Alsdorf
Executive Director, Redeemer’s Center for Faith & Work
INTRODUCTION
The Importance of Recovering
Vocation
Robert Bellah’s landmark book, Habits of the Heart, helped
many people name the thing that was (and still is) eating away
at the cohesiveness of our culture—“expressive
individualism.” Elsewhere, Bellah argued that Americans had
created a culture that elevated individual choice and expression
to such a level that there was no longer any shared life, no
commanding truths or values that tied us together. As Bellah
wrote, “. . . we are moving to an ever greater validation of the
sacredness of the individual person, [but] our capacity to
imagine a social fabric that would hold individuals together is
vanishing. . . . The sacredness of the individual is not balanced
by any sense of the whole or concern for the common good.”
2
But near the end of Habits, the author proposes one measure
that would go a long way toward reweaving the unraveling
culture:
To make a real difference . . . [there would have to be]
a reappropriation of the idea of vocation or calling, a
return in a new way to the idea of work as a
contribution to the good of all and not merely as a
means to one’s own advancement.3
That is a remarkable statement. If Bellah is right, one of the
hopes for our unraveling society is the recovery of the idea
that all human work is not merely a job but a calling. The Latin
word vocare—to call—is at the root of our common word
“vocation.” Today the word often means simply a job, but that
was not the originalsense. A job is a vocation only if someone
else calls you to do it and you do it for themrather than for
yourself. And so our work can be a calling only if it is
reimagined as a mission of service to something beyond merely
our own interests. As we shallsee, thinking of work mainly as a
means of self-fulfillment and self-realization slowly crushes a
person and—as Bellah and many others have pointed out—
undermines society itself.
But if we are to “reappropriate” an older idea, we must look
at that idea’s origin. In this case, the source of the idea of work
as vocation is the Christian Scriptures. And so, taking our cue
fromBellah’s challenge, in this book we will do what we can to
help illuminate the transformative and revolutionary
connection between Christian faith and the workplace. We’ll be
referring to this connection—and all the ideas and practices
surrounding it—as the “integration of faith and work.”
The Many “Streams” of Faith and Work
We are not alone in this attempt. Perhaps not since the
Protestant Reformation has there been so much attention paid
to the relationship of Christian faith to work as there is today.
The number of books, scholarly projects, academic programs,
and online discussions on this subject has grown
exponentially in the past two decades. Nevertheless, Christians
who are seeking practical guidance for their work are often
poorly served by this growing movement. Some, like Katherine
Alsdorf (see the Foreword), have been frustrated by the
shallowness of the advice and examples. Others are bewildered
by the diversity—some would say cacophony—of voices
giving counsel on how to be a Christian at work.
We can think of the current “faith and work movement” as
a river being fed by a number of streams fromvery different
headwaters. Perhaps most of the energy and most of the
groups seeking to help people integrate faith and work are
those with an evangelical understanding of the Bible and the
Christian faith, but there have been very significant
contributions fromother traditions and wings of the faith. The
ecumenical movement has contributed an emphasis on
Christians using their work to further social justice in the world.
That helped us understand that faithful work demands the
application of distinctly Christian ethics.4 The small group
movement of the twentieth century emphasized the need for
believers to give one another nurture and support for the
struggles and hardships of work. This showed us that faithful
work requires inner spiritual renewal and heart transformation.5
The revivalist impulse within evangelicalismhas seen the
workplace especially as a place to be a witness for Jesus
Christ.6 Faithful work indeed means some kind of public
identification with Jesus, in such a way that a coworker might
want to know more about him.
Many have also sought older sources for the integration of
faith and work. The sixteenth-century Protestant Reformers,
particularly Martin Luther and John Calvin, argued that all
work, even so-called secular work, was as much a calling from
God as the ministry of the monk or priest.7 The headwaters of
Lutheran theology put specialstress on the dignity of all work,
observing that God cared for, fed, clothed, sheltered, and
supported the human race through our human labor. When we
work, we are, as those in the Lutheran tradition often put it, the
“fingers of God,” the agents of his providential love for others.
This understanding elevates the purpose of work frommaking
a living to loving our neighbor and at the same time releases us
fromthe crushing burden of working primarily to prove
ourselves. Those in the Calvinist, or “Reformed,” tradition,
such as AbrahamKuyper, spoke of another aspect to the idea
of work as God’s calling. Work not only cares for creation, but
also directs and structures it. In this Reformed view, the
purpose of work is to create a culture that honors God and
enables people to thrive. Yes, we must love our neighbor, but
Christianity gives us very specific teachings about human
nature and what makes human beings flourish. We must ensure
that our work is done in line with these understandings.
Faithful work, then, is to operate out of a Christian
“worldview.”
8
All of these different traditions give somewhat different
answers to the question of how we should go about the task of
recapturing vocation. The streams are often confusing to
Christians, for they are not perfectly complementary to one
another. Lutheran theology tends to resist the Reformed idea
of “worldview” and argues that Christians should not do their
work in a very different way fromnon-Christians. Much of the
mainline church does not feel the same urgency that
evangelicals feel to evangelize, because it does not see
classical Christianity as the only way to salvation. Many find
the emphasis of worldview-oriented writers and organizations
to be too cognitive, with too little emphasis on inner heart
change. And even those people cannot agree on what inner
transformation and spiritual growth actually look like. So if you
are a Christian who is trying to be faithful in your work, you
might find yourself trying to weigh sentiments as varied as
these:
• The way to serve God at work is to further social justice in
the world.
• The way to serve God at work is to be personally honest
and evangelize your colleagues.
• The way to serve God at work is just to do skillful,
excellent work.
• The way to serve God at work is to create beauty.
• The way to serve God at work is to work froma Christian
motivation to glorify God, seeking to engage and
influence culture to that end.
• The way to serve God at work is to work with a grateful,
joyful, gospel-changed heart through all the ups and
downs.
• The way to serve God at work is to do whatever gives you
the greatest joy and passion.
• The way to serve God at work is to make as much money
as you can, so that you can be as generous as you can.
To what extent are these sentiments complementary or
actually opposed to one another? That is a difficult question,
for there is at least a measure of biblical warrant for every one
of them. And the difficulty lies not merely in the plethora of
theological commitments and cultural factors involved, but also
in how they operate in different ways depending on the field or
type of work. Christian ethics, motives, identity, witness, and
worldview shape our work in very different ways depending on
the formof the work.
For example, suppose a Christian visual artist regularly
shows concern for justice, conducts her career with honesty in
all transactions, has support fromothers to help her navigate
the ups and downs of life, lets others in her field know of her
Christian faith, and understands her art to be an act of service
to God and her neighbors rather than as a way to get self-worth
and status. Is that all it means to integrate her faith with her
work? In addition to these, does the Christian teaching about
the nature of reality bear on what she depicts and how she
depicts it through her art? Will it influence what stories she
tells with her art? Will her art be influenced by her beliefs about
sin and redemption and hope for the future? It seems that it
must be. And so we discover that faithful work requires the
will, the emotions, the soul, and the mind—as we think out and
live out the implications of our beliefs on the canvas of our
daily work.
On the other hand, what if you are a Christian pianist, or a
shoemaker? How does a Christian worldview affect the type of
shoe you make, or the way you play the Moonlight Sonata?
The answer is not so clear.
Who will deliver us fromall this complexity? Most people
who have begun to read books or become involved in groups
integrating faith and work have either (a) only partaken of one
of the theologicalstreams or (b) already been confused by
reading or hearing contradictory teaching fromdifferent
streams. There is a tendency for churches and organizations
emphasizing faith and work to be somewhat unbalanced,
emphasizing one or two of these story lines to the exclusion of
the others. Yet simply combining all the emphases—and
hoping they add up to something coherent—is not the
solution.
We do not expect to resolve all these differences in this
book. But we do hope to make things clearer. And we can
begin by making two observations about the list of
propositions above. First, if you revise each of the
propositions by adding the word “main”—as in “the main way
to serve God at work is . . .”—then the views do in fact
contradict. You will have to choose one or two and discard the
rest. In fact, most people who hold forth on issues of faith and
work do exactly this, either tacitly or explicitly. But if you keep
the propositions the way they are, claiming that each is a way
to serve God through work, then the different statements are
ultimately complementary. Second, as we have already noted,
these factors can assume very different forms and levels of
importance depending on your particular vocation, culture, and
historical moment. When we keep these two principles in mind,
we can move forward looking at the various streams,
statements, and truths as a kind of tool kit to be used to build a
model for the integration of faith and work in your field, time,
and place.
Just as important as making these ideas clearer, we aimto
make themmore vivid, real, and practical. Our goal is to feed
your imagination and stir your action with the richness of what
the Christian faith says (directly and indirectly) about this
inexhaustible subject. The Bible teems with wisdom, resources,
and hope for anyone who is learning to work, looking for work,
trying to work, or going to work. And when we say that the
Christian Scriptures “give us hope” for work, we at once
acknowledge both how deeply frustrating and difficult work
can be and how profound the spiritual hope must be if we are
going to face the challenge of pursuing vocation in this world.
I know of no more provocative witness to this hope than the
overlooked little story by J.R.R. Tolkien “Leaf by Niggle.”
There Really Is a Tree
When J.R.R. Tolkien had been working on writing The Lord of
the Rings for some time, he came to an impasse.9 He had a
vision of a tale of a sort that the world had never seen. As a
leading scholar in Old English and other ancient Northern
European languages, he knew that most ancient British myths
about the inhabitants of “Faerie”—elves, dwarves, giants, and
sorcerers—had been lost (unlike the myths of the Greeks and
Romans or even of the Scandinavians). He had always dreamed
of re-creating and reimagining what an ancient English
mythology would look like. The Lord of the Rings was rooted
in this lost world. The project required creating at least the
rudiments of several imaginary languages and cultures as well
as thousands of years of various national histories—all in
order to give the narrative the necessary depth and realismthat
Tolkien believed was crucial for the tale to be compelling.
As he worked on the manuscript, he came to the place
where the narrative had divided into a number of subplots.
Major characters were traveling to various parts of his
imaginary world, facing different perils, and experiencing
several complicated chains of events. It was an enormous
challenge to unfold all these subnarratives clearly and then
give each a satisfactory resolution. Not only that, but World
War II had begun, and though the fifty-year-old Tolkien was
not called into the military, the shadow of war fell heavily on
him. He had experienced firsthand the horror of World War I
and had never forgotten it. Britain was now in a precarious
position, with invasion imminent. Who knew if he’d survive the
war even as a civilian?
He began to despair of ever completing the work of his life.
It was not just a labor of a few years at that point. When he
began The Lord of the Rings, he had already been working on
the languages, histories, and stories behind the story for
decades. The thought of not finishing it was “a dreadful and
numbing thought.”
10 There was in those days a tree in the road
near Tolkien’s house, and one day he arose to find that it had
been lopped and mutilated by a neighbor. He began to think of
his mythology as his “internal Tree” that might suffer the same
fate. He had run out of “mental energy and invention.”
11 One
morning he woke up with a short story in his mind and wrote it
down. When The Dublin Review called for a piece, he sent it in
with the title “Leaf by Niggle.” It was about a painter.
In the first lines of the story we are told two things about
this painter. First, his name was Niggle. The Oxford English
Dictionary, to which Tolkien was a contributor, defines
“niggle” as “to work . . . in a fiddling or ineffective way . . . to
spend time unnecessarily on petty details.”
12 Niggle was of
course Tolkien himself, who knew very well this was one of his
own flaws. He was a perfectionist, always unhappy with what
he had produced, often distracted frommore important issues
by fussing over less important details, prone to worry and
procrastination. Niggle was the same.
We are also told that Niggle “had a long journey to make.
He did not want to go, indeed the whole idea was distasteful to
him; but he could not get out of it.” Niggle continually put the
journey off, but he knew it was inevitable. TomShippey, who
also taught Old English literature at Oxford, explains that in
Anglo-Saxon literature the “necessary long journey” was
death.13
Niggle had one picture in particular that he was trying to
paint. He had gotten in his mind the picture of a leaf, and then
that of a whole tree. And then in his imagination, behind the
tree “a country began to open out; and there were glimpses of
a forest marching over the land, and of mountains tipped with
snow.” Niggle lost interest in all his other pictures, and in order
to accommodate his vision, he laid out a canvas so large he
needed a ladder. Niggle knew he had to die, but he told himself,
“At any rate, I shall get this one picture done, my real picture,
before I have to go on that wretched journey.”
So he worked on his canvas, “putting in a touch here, and
rubbing out a patch there,” but he never got much done. There
were two reasons for this. First, it was because he was the
“sort of painter who can paint leaves better than trees. He used
to spend a long time on a single leaf, . . .” trying to get the
shading and the sheen and the dewdrops on it just right. So no
matter how hard he worked, very little actually showed up on
the canvas itself. The second reason was his “kind heart.”
Niggle was constantly distracted by doing things his
neighbors asked himto do for them. In particular, his neighbor
Parish, who did not appreciate Niggle’s painting at all, asked
himto do many things for him.
One night when Niggle senses, rightly, that his time is
almost up, Parish insists that he go out into the wet and cold to
fetch a doctor for his sick wife. As a result he comes down with
a chill and fever, and while working desperately on his
unfinished picture, the Driver comes to take Niggle on the
journey he has put off. When he realizes he must go, he bursts
into tears. “‘Oh, dear!’ said poor Niggle, beginning to weep,
‘And it’s not even finished!’” Sometime after his death the
people who acquired his house noticed that on his crumbling
canvas his only “one beautiful leaf” had remained intact. It was
put in the Town Museum, “and for a long while ‘Leaf: by
Niggle’ hung there in a recess, and was noticed by a few eyes.”
But the story does not end there. After death Niggle is put
on a train toward the mountains of the heavenly afterlife. At
one point on his trip he hears two Voices. One seems to be
Justice, the severe voice, which says that Niggle wasted so
much time and accomplished so little in life. But the other,
gentler voice (“though it was not soft”), which seems to be
Mercy, counters that Niggle has chosen to sacrifice for others,
knowing what he was doing. As a reward, when Niggle gets to
the outskirts of the heavenly country, something catches his
eye. He runs to it—and there it is: “Before himstood the Tree,
his Tree, finished; its leaves opening, its branches growing and
bending in the wind that Niggle had so often felt or guessed,
and yet had so often failed to catch. He gazed at the Tree, and
slowly he lifted his arms and opened themwide. ‘It is a gift!’ he
said.”
14
The world before death—his old country—had forgotten
Niggle almost completely, and there his work had ended
unfinished and helpful to only a very few. But in his new
country, the permanently real world, he finds that his tree, in
full detail and finished, was not just a fancy of his that had died
with him. No, it was indeed part of the True Reality that would
live and be enjoyed forever.15
I’ve recounted this story many times to people of various
professions—particularly artists and other creatives—and
regardless of their beliefs about God and the afterlife, they are
often deeply moved. Tolkien had a very Christian
understanding of art and, indeed, of all work.16 He believed
that God gives us talents and gifts so we can do for one
another what he wants to do for us and through us. As a
writer, for example, he could fill people’s lives with meaning
through the telling of stories that convey the nature of
reality.17 Niggle was assured that the tree he had “felt and
guessed” was “a true part of creation”
18 and that even the
small bit of it he had unveiled to people on earth had been a
vision of the True. Tolkien was very comforted by his own
story. It helped “exorcise some of Tolkien’s fear, and to get him
to work again,” though it was also the friendship and loving
prodding of C.S. Lewis that helped get himback to the
writing.19
Artists and entrepreneurs can identify very readily with
Niggle. They work fromvisions, often very big ones, of a world
they can uniquely imagine. Few realize even a significant
percentage of their vision, and even fewer claimto have come
close. Those of us who tend to be overly perfectionistic and
methodical, like Tolkien himself, can also identify strongly with
the character of Niggle.
But really—everyone is Niggle. Everyone imagines
accomplishing things, and everyone finds him-or herself
largely incapable of producing them. Everyone wants to be
successful rather than forgotten, and everyone wants to make
a difference in life. But that is beyond the control of any of us.
If this life is all there is, then everything will eventually burn up
in the death of the sun and no one will even be around to
remember anything that has ever happened. Everyone will be
forgotten, nothing we do will make any difference, and all good
endeavors, even the best, will come to naught.
Unless there is God. If the God of the Bible exists, and there
is a True Reality beneath and behind this one, and this life is
not the only life, then every good endeavor, even the simplest
ones, pursued in response to God’s calling, can matter forever.
That is what the Christian faith promises. “In the Lord, your
labor is not in vain,” writes Paul in the first letter to the
Corinthians, chapter 15, verse 58. He was speaking of Christian
ministry, but Tolkien’s story shows how this can ultimately be
true of all work. Tolkien had readied himself, through Christian
truth, for very modest accomplishment in the eyes of this
world. (The irony is that he produced something so many
people consider a work of genius that it is one of the
bestselling books in the history of the world.)
What about you? Let’s say that you go into city planning
as a young person. Why? You are excited about cities, and you
have a vision about how a real city ought to be. You are likely
to be discouraged because throughout your life you probably
will not get more than a leaf or a branch done. But there really
is a New Jerusalem, a heavenly city, which will come down to
earth like a bride dressed for her husband (Revelation 21–22).
Or let’s say you are a lawyer, and you go into law because
you have a vision for justice and a vision for a flourishing
society ruled by equity and peace. In ten years you will be
deeply disillusioned because you will find that as much as you
are trying to work on important things, so much of what you do
is minutiae. Once or twice in your life you may feel like you
have finally “gotten a leaf out.”
Whatever your work, you need to know this: There really is
a tree. Whatever you are seeking in your work—the city of
justice and peace, the world of brilliance and beauty, the story,
the order, the healing—it is there. There is a God, there is a
future healed world that he will bring about, and your work is
showing it (in part) to others. Your work will be only partially
successful, on your best days, in bringing that world about.
But inevitably the whole tree that you seek—the beauty,
harmony, justice, comfort, joy, and community—will come to
fruition. If you know all this, you won’t be despondent
because you can get only a leaf or two out in this life. You will
work with satisfaction and joy. You will not be puffed up by
success or devastated by setbacks.
I just said, “If you know all this.” In order to work in this
way—to get the consolation and freedomthat Tolkien received
fromhis Christian faith for his work—you need to know the
Bible’s answers to three questions: Why do you want to work?
(That is, why do we need to work in order to lead a fulfilled
life?) Why is it so hard to work? (That is, why is it so often
fruitless, pointless, and difficult?) How can we overcome the
difficulties and find satisfaction in our work through the
gospel? The rest of this book willseek to answer those three
questions in its three sections, respectively.
PART ONE
God’s Plan for Work
ONE
The Design of Work
Thus the heavens and the earth were finished, and
all the host of them. And on the seventh day God
finished his work that he had done, and he rested on
the seventh day from all his work that he had done.
So God blessed the seventh day and made it holy,
because on it God rested from all his work that he
had done in creation. . . . The Lord God took the
man and put him in the garden of Eden to work it
and keep it.
Genesis 2:1–3, 15 (ESV)
In the Beginning, There Was Work
The Bible begins talking about work as soon as it begins
talking about anything—that is how important and basic it is.
The author of the book of Genesis describes God’s creation of
the world as work.20
In fact, he depicts the magnificent project
of cosmos invention within a regular workweek of seven
days.21 And then he shows us human beings working in
paradise. This view of work—connected with divine, orderly
creation and human purpose—is distinct among the great
faiths and belief systems of the world.
The creation narrative in the book of Genesis is unique
among ancient accounts of origins. Many cultures had stories
that depicted the beginning of the world and human history as
the result of a struggle between warring cosmic forces. In the
Babylonian creation story the Enuma Elish, the god Marduk
overcomes the goddess Tiamat and forges the world out of her
remains. In this and similar accounts, the visible universe was
an uneasy balance of powers in tension with one another.22
In
the Bible, however, creation is not the result of a conflict, for
God has no rivals. Indeed, all the powers and beings of heaven
and earth are created by himand dependent on him.23 Creation,
then, is not the aftermath of a battle but the plan of a craftsman.
God made the world not as a warrior digs a trench but as an
artist makes a masterpiece.
The Greeks’ account of creation includes the idea of
successive “ages of mankind” beginning with a golden age.
During this age human beings and gods lived on the earth
together in harmony. This sounds at first vaguely like the story
of the garden of Eden, but one dissimilarity is very telling. The
poet Hesiod tells us that neither humans nor gods in the
golden age had to do any work. In that original paradise the
earth simply provided food in abundance.24 The book of
Genesis could not have been more different. Repeatedly the
first chapters of the book of Genesis describe God at “work,”
using the Hebrew mlkh, the word for ordinary human work. As
one scholar put it, it is wholly “unexpected that the
extraordinary divine activity involved in creating heaven and
earth should be so described.”
25
In the beginning, then, God worked. Work was not a
necessary evil that came into the picture later, or something
human beings were created to do but that was beneath the
great God himself. No, God worked for the sheer joy of it. Work
could not have a more exalted inauguration.
The Forms of God’s Work
It is remarkable that in Chapter 1 of the book of Genesis, God
not only works but finds delight in it. “God saw all that he had
made, and it was very good . . . the heavens and the earth were
completed in all their vast array” (Genesis 1:31; 2:1). God finds
what he has done beautiful. He stands back, takes in “all that
he has made,” and says, in effect, “That’s good!” Like all good
and satisfying work, the worker sees himself in it. “The
harmony and perfection of the completed heavens and earth
express more adequately the character of their creator than any
of the separate components can.”
26
The second chapter of Genesis goes on to show that God
works not only to create but also to care for his creation. This
is what theologians call the work of “providence.” God creates
human beings and then works for themas their Provider. He
forms a man (Genesis 2:7), plants a garden for himand waters it
(Genesis 2:6, 8), and fashions a wife for him(Genesis 2:21–22).
The rest of the Bible tells us that God continues this work as
Provider, caring for the world by watering and cultivating the
ground (Psalm104:10–22), giving food to all he has made,
giving help to all who suffer, and caring for the needs of every
living thing (Psalm145:14–16).
Finally, we see God not only working, but commissioning
workers to carry on his work. In Genesis chapter 1, verse 28 he
tells human beings to “fill the earth and subdue it.” The word
“subdue” indicates that, though all God had made was good, it
was still to a great degree undeveloped. God left creation with
deep untapped potential for cultivation that people were to
unlock through their labor.27
In Genesis chapter 2, verse 15
(ESV) he puts human beings into the garden to “work it and
keep it.” The implication is that, while God works for us as our
Provider, we also work for him. Indeed, he works through us.
Psalm127, verse 1—“Unless the Lord builds the house, the
builders labor in vain”—indicates that God is building the
house (providing for us) through the builders. As Martin
Luther argued, Psalm145 says that God feeds every living
thing, meaning he is feeding us through the labor of farmers
and others.28
The Goodness of Our Work
The book of Genesis leaves us with a striking truth—work was
part of paradise. One biblicalscholar summed it up: “It is
perfectly clear that God’s good plan always included human
beings working, or, more specifically, living in the constant
cycle of work and rest.”
29 Again, the contrast with other
religions and cultures could not be sharper. Work did not come
in after a golden age of leisure. It was part of God’s perfect
design for human life, because we were made in God’s image,
and part of his glory and happiness is that he works, as does
the Son of God, who said, “My Father is always at his work to
this very day, and I too amworking” (John 5:17).
The fact that God put work in paradise is startling to us
because we so often think of work as a necessary evil or even
punishment. Yet we do not see work brought into our human
story after the fall of Adam, as part of the resulting brokenness
and curse; it is part of the blessedness of the garden of God.
Work is as much a basic human need as food, beauty, rest,
friendship, prayer, and sexuality; it is not simply medicine but
food for our soul. Without meaningful work we sense
significant inner loss and emptiness. People who are cut off
fromwork because of physical or other reasons quickly
discover how much they need work to thrive emotionally,
physically, and spiritually.
Our friends Jay and Barbara Belding, entrepreneurs in
suburban Philadelphia, recognized this need even among
developmentally disabled adults. While working as a special
education teacher, Jay was disconcerted by the vocational
prospects of his students once they completed school.
Traditional vocational training and employment programs often
had insufficient work and therefore extensive downtime with no
wages. In 1977 Jay and Barbara established Associated
Production Services, an enterprise providing quality training
and employment for this population. Today the company trains
480 people who are engaged in a variety of labor-intensive
packaging and assembly work for a number of consumer
products companies at four facilities. Jay focuses on providing
tools and systems that ensure quality and increase efficiencies
and output; this helps create a culture of success for the
company and the people they serve. The Beldings are thrilled
and grateful to have found a practical, sustainable way to meet
their employees’ intrinsic need to be productive: “Our people
want to participate in the ‘work-a-day’ world; to feel positive
about themselves; and to help pay their own way.” Their
employees are finally able to respond fully to a vital aspect of
their design as workers and creators.
Work is so foundational to our makeup, in fact, that it is
one of the few things we can take in significant doses without
harm. Indeed, the Bible does not say we should work one day
and rest six, or that work and rest should be balanced evenly—
but directs us to the opposite ratio. Leisure and pleasure are
great goods, but we can take only so much of them. If you ask
people in nursing homes or hospitals how they are doing, you
will often hear that their main regret is that they wish they had
something to do, some way to be useful to others. They feel
they have too much leisure and not enough work. The loss of
work is deeply disturbing because we were designed for it.
This realization injects a deeper and far more positive meaning
into the common view that people work in order to survive.
According to the Bible, we don’t merely need the money from
work to survive; we need the work itself to survive and live
fully human lives.
The reasons for this are developed more fully in later
chapters, but they include the fact that work is one of the ways
we make ourselves useful to others, rather than just living a life
for ourselves. Also, work is also one of the ways we discover
who we are, because it is through work that we come to
understand our distinct abilities and gifts, a major component
in our identities.30 So author Dorothy Sayers could write,
“What is the Christian understanding of work?. . . [It] is that
work is not, primarily, a thing one does to live, but the thing
one lives to do. It is, or it should be, the full expression of the
worker’s faculties . . . the mediumin which he offers himself to
God.”
31
The Freedom of Our Work
To see work in our “DNA,” our design, is part of what it means
to grasp the distinct Christian understanding of freedom.
Modern people like to see freedomas the complete absence of
any constraints. But think of a fish. Because a fish absorbs
oxygen fromwater, not air, it is free only if it is restricted to
water. If a fish is “freed” fromthe river and put out on the grass
to explore, its freedomto move and soon even to live is
destroyed. The fish is not more free, but less free, if it cannot
honor the reality of its nature. The same is true with airplanes
and birds. If they violate the laws of aerodynamics, they will
crash into the ground. But if they follow them, they will ascend
and soar. The same is true in many areas of life: Freedomis not
so much the absence of restrictions as finding the right ones,
those that fit with the realities of our own nature and those of
the world.32
So the commandments of God in the Bible are a means of
liberation, because through themGod calls us to be what he
built us to be. Cars work well when you follow the owner’s
manual and honor the design of the car. If you fail to change
the oil, no one will fine you or take you to jail; your car will
simply break down because you violated its nature. You suffer
a natural consequence. In the same way, human life works
properly only when it is conducted in line with the “owner’s
manual,” the commandments of God. If you disobey the
commands, not only do you grieve and dishonor God, you are
actually acting against your own nature as God designed you.
When God speaks to disobedient Israel in Isaiah chapter 48, he
says, “I amthe Lord your God, who teaches you what is best
for you, who directs you in the way you should go. If only you
had paid attention to my commands, your peace would have
been like a river, your well-being like the waves of the sea”
(Isaiah 48:17–18).
And so it is with work, which (in rhythmwith rest) is one of
the Ten Commandments. “Sixdays you shall labor and do all
your work” (Exodus 20:9). In the beginning God created us to
work, and now he calls us and directs us unambiguously to live
out that part of our design. This is not a burdensome
command; it is an invitation to freedom.
The Limits of All Work
Nevertheless, it is meaningful that God himself rested after
work (Genesis 2:2). Many people make the mistake of thinking
that work is a curse and that something else (leisure, family, or
even “spiritual” pursuits) is the only way to find meaning in
life. The Bible, as we have seen and willsee, exposes the lie of
this idea. But it also keeps us fromfalling into the opposite
mistake, namely, that work is the only important human activity
and that rest is a necessary evil—something we do strictly to
“recharge our batteries” in order to continue to work. We look
to what we know about God to make this case. He did not need
any restoration of his strength—and yet he rested on the
seventh day (Genesis 2:1–3). As beings made in his image,
then we can assume that rest, and the things you do as you
rest, are good and life-giving in and of themselves. Work is not
all there is to life. You will not have a meaningful life without
work, but you cannot say that your work is the meaning of
your life. If you make any work the purpose of your life—even
if that work is church ministry—you create an idol that rivals
God. Your relationship with God is the most important
foundation for your life, and indeed it keeps all the other
factors—work, friendships and family, leisure and pleasure—
frombecoming so important to you that they become addicting
and distorted.
Josef Pieper, a twentieth-century German Catholic
philosopher, wrote a famous essay called “Leisure, the Basis of
Culture.” Pieper argues that leisure is not the mere absence of
work, but an attitude of mind or soul in which you are able to
contemplate and enjoy things as they are in themselves,
without regard to their value or their immediate utility. The
work-obsessed mind—as in our Western culture—tends to
look at everything in terms of efficiency, value, and speed. But
there must also be an ability to enjoy the most simple and
ordinary aspects of life, even ones that are not strictly useful,
but just delightful. Surprisingly, even the reputedly dour
Reformer John Calvin agrees. In his treatment of the Christian
life, he warns against valuing things only for their utility:
Did God create food only to provide for necessity
[nutrition] and not also for delight and good cheer?
So too the purpose of clothing apart fromnecessity
[protection] was comeliness and decency. In grasses,
trees, and fruits, apart fromtheir various uses, there is
beauty of appearance and pleasantness of fragrance.
. . . Did he not, in short, render many things attractive
to us, apart fromtheir necessary use?
33
In other words, we are to look at everything and say
something like:
All things bright and beautiful; all creatures great and
small
All things wise and wonderful—the Lord God made
themall.34
Unless we regularly stop work and take time to worship
(which Pieper considers one of the chief activities within
“leisure”) and simply contemplate and enjoy the world—
including the fruit of our labor—we cannot truly experience
meaning in our lives. Pieper writes:
Leisure is the condition of considering things in a
celebrating spirit. . . . Leisure lives on affirmation. It is
not the same as the absence of activity. . . . It is rather
like the stillness in the conversation of lovers, which
is fed by their oneness. . . . And as it is written in the
Scriptures, God saw, when “he rested fromall the
works that He had made” that everything was good,
very good (Genesis 1:31), just so the leisure of man
includes within itself a celebratory, approving,
lingering gaze of the inner eye on the reality of
creation.35
In short, work—and lots of it—is an indispensable
component in a meaningful human life. It is a supreme gift from
God and one of the main things that gives our lives purpose.
But it must play its proper role, subservient to God. It must
regularly give way not just to work stoppage for bodily repair
but also to joyful reception of the world and of ordinary life.
This may seemobvious to us. We say, “Of course work is
important, and of course it isn’t the only thing in life.” But it is
crucial to grasp these truths well. For in a fallen world, work is
frustrating and exhausting; one can easily jump to the
conclusion that work is to be avoided or simply endured. And
because our disordered hearts crave affirmation and validation,
it is just as tempting to be thrust in the opposite direction—
making life all about career accomplishment and very little else.
In fact, overwork is often a grimattempt to get our lifetime’s
worth of work out of the way early, so we can put work behind
us. These attitudes will only make work more stultifying and
unsatisfying in the end.
When we think, “I hate work!” we should remember that,
despite the fact that work can be a particularly potent reminder
(and even amplifier) of the curse of sin on all things, it is not
itself a curse. We were built for it and freed by it. But when we
feel that our lives are completely absorbed by work, remember
that we must also honor work’s limits. There is no better
starting point for a meaningful work life than a firmgrasp of
this balanced work and rest theology.
TWO
The Dignity of Work
Then God said, “Let us make mankind in our image,
in our likeness, so that they may rule over the fish in
the sea and the birds in the sky, over the livestock
and all the wild animals, and over all the creatures
that move along the ground.”
So God created mankind in his own image, in the
image of God he created them; male and female he
created them.
Genesis 1:26–27
Work as a Demeaning Necessity
Ayn Rand is one of the most widely read twentieth-century
philosophers on the subject of work. In her two most famous
novels, she creates characters who push against the trends of
socialismand collectivism. Howard Roark, the architect in The
Fountainhead, stirs the soul with his passion for creating
buildings that creatively use the resources of the natural
environment, tastefully complement their naturalsurroundings,
and efficiently serve the needs of their intended occupants.
Rand portrays himas fully human, in comparison to other
architects who do their work for money or prestige. In Atlas
Shrugged we have a very different hero, John Galt, who leads a
strike by the society’s most productive people, who refuse to
be exploited any longer. He hopes to demonstrate that a world
in which persons are not free to create is doomed. To Rand,
creative, productive work is essential to human dignity but is
typically demeaned by bureaucracy and commonness. One of
her characters in Atlas Shrugged states, “Whether it’s a
symphony or a coal mine, all work is an act of creating and
comes fromthe same source: . . . the capacity to see, to connect
and to make what had not been seen, connected and made
before.”
36
Rand has glimpsed one of the core aspects of man’s
dignity, as we come to understand it fromreading Genesis 1.
Unfortunately, she also was one of the twentieth century’s
most vocal critics of Christianity, rejecting the God of the Bible
who made man in his own image. Still, we see that work is a
major component of human dignity—it resonates today even
with the most secular thinkers. That was not always so.
The ancient Greeks, who also thought that the gods made
human beings for work, saw this as no blessing. Work was
demeaning. As Italian philosopher Adriano Tilgher put it, “To
the Greeks, work was a curse and nothing else.”
37
In fact,
Aristotle said that unemployment—by which he meant the
ability to live without having to work—was a primary
qualification for a genuinely worthwhile life.38 What led the
Greeks to this view of work?
Plato in his dialogue Phaedo argues that being in the body
distorts and hampers the soul in its quest for truth. In this life,
the person who develops spiritual insight and purity must do
so by ignoring the body as much as possible. Death is
therefore a formof liberation and even a friend of the soul.39
“The Greek philosophers largely thought of the gods as perfect
minds—solitary, self-sufficient, uninvolved in the stuff of the
world or the hubbub of human affairs. Human beings were to
become like the gods by withdrawing fromactive life and
devoting themselves to contemplation.”
40 Contemplation
helped you realize that the material world is temporary and
even illusory, and that being overinvolved or emotionally
attached to it pulls you down into a kind of animal existence of
fear, anger, and anxiety. Instead, the way to true peace and
happiness was to learn how to achieve a “non-attachment” to
the things of this world. Epictetus taught his disciples that “the
good life is a life stripped of both hopes and fears. In other
words, a life reconciled to what is the case, a life which accepts
the world as it is.”
41 To be most human was to be the least
involved, and the least invested, in the material world.
Work, then, was a barrier to the highest kind of life. Work
made it impossible to rise above the earthbound humdrumof
life into the realmof philosophy, the domain of the gods. The
Greeks understood that life in the world required work, but they
believed that not all work was created equal. Work that used
the mind rather than the body was nobler, less beastly. The
highest formof work was the most cognitive and the least
manual. “The whole Greek socialstructure helped to support
such an outlook, for it rested on the premise that slaves and
[craftsmen] did the work, enabling the elite to devote
themselves to the exercise of the mind in art, philosophy, and
politics.”
42 Aristotle very famously said in his Politics I.V.8
that some people are born to be slaves. He meant that some
people are not as capable of higher rational thought and
therefore should do the work that frees the more talented and
brilliant to pursue a life of honor and culture.
Modern people bristle with outrage at such a statement, but
while we do not today hold with the idea of literalslavery, the
attitudes behind Aristotle’s statement are alive and well.
Christian philosopher Lee Hardy and many others have argued
that this “Greek attitude toward work and its place in human life
was largely preserved in both the thought and practice of the
Christian church” through the centuries, and still holds a great
deal of influence today in our culture.43 What has come down
to us is a set of pervasive ideas.
One is that work is a necessary evil. The only good work, in
this view, is work that helps make us money so that we can
support our families and pay others to do menial work. Second,
we believe that lower-status or lower-paying work is an assault
on our dignity. One result of this belief is that many people
take jobs that they are not suited for at all, choosing to aimfor
careers that do not fit their gifts but promise higher wages and
prestige. Western societies are increasingly divided between
the highly remunerated “knowledge classes” and the more
poorly remunerated “service sector,” and most of us accept
and perpetuate the value judgments that attach to these
categories. Another result is that many people will choose to
be unemployed rather than do work that they feel is beneath
them, and most service and manual labor falls into this
category. Often people who have made it into the knowledge
classes show great disdain for the concierges, handymen, dry
cleaners, cooks, gardeners, and others who hold service jobs.
Work as a Mark of Human Dignity
The biblical view of these matters is utterly different. Work of
all kinds, whether with the hands or the mind, evidences our
dignity as human beings—because it reflects the image of God
the Creator in us. Biblicalscholar Derek Kidner notices
something profound in the creation of animals and human
beings in Genesis chapter 1: Only man is set apart and given a
job description, “an of ice (1:26b, 28b; 2:19; cf. Ps.8:4–8; James
3:7) . . .”
44
In other words, while the plants and animals are
called to simply “teem” and “reproduce,” only humans are
explicitly given a job. They are called to “subdue” and “have
dominion,” or rule the earth.
We are given specific work to do because we are made in
God’s image. What does this mean? “The rulers of the ancient
Near East set up images and statues of themselves in places
where they exercised or claimed to exercise authority. The
images represented the ruler himself as symbols of his
presence and authority . . .”
45 The close connection of Genesis
chapter 1, verse 26 with the mandate to “rule” shows that this
act of ruling is a defining aspect of what it means to be made in
God’s image. We are called to stand in for God here in the
world, exercising stewardship over the rest of creation in his
place as his vice-regents. We share in doing the things that
God has done in creation—bringing order out of chaos,
creatively building a civilization out of the material of physical
and human nature, caring for all that God has made. This is a
major part of what we were created to be.
While the Greek thinkers saw ordinary work, especially
manual labor, as relegating human beings to the animal level,
the Bible sees all work as distinguishing human beings from
animals and elevating themto a place of dignity. Old Testament
scholar Victor Hamilton notes that in surrounding cultures
such as Egypt and Mesopotamia, the king or others of royal
blood might be called the “image of God”; but, he notes, that
rarefied term“was not applied to the canal digger or to the
mason who worked on the ziggurat. . . . [But Genesis chapter 1
uses] royal language to describe simply ‘man.’ In God’s eyes
all of mankind is royal. The Bible democratizes the royalistic
and exclusivistic concepts of the nations that surrounded
Israel.”
46
Work has dignity because it is something that God does
and because we do it in God’s place, as his representatives.
We learn not only that work has dignity in itself, but also that
all kinds of work have dignity. God’s own work in Genesis 1
and 2 is “manual” labor, as he shapes us out of the dust of the
earth, deliberately putting a spirit in a physical body, and as he
plants a garden (Genesis 2:8). It is hard for us today to realize
how revolutionary this idea has been in the history of human
thinking. Minister and author Phillip Jensen puts it this way: “If
God came into the world, what would he be like? For the
ancient Greeks, he might have been a philosopher-king. The
ancient Romans might have looked for a just and noble
statesman. But how does the God of the Hebrews come into
the world? As a carpenter.”
47
The current economic era has given us fresh impulses and
new ways to stigmatize work such as farming and caring for
children—jobs that supposedly are not “knowledge” jobs and
therefore do not pay very well. But in Genesis we see God as a
gardener, and in the New Testament we see himas a carpenter.
No task is too small a vessel to hold the immense dignity of
work given by God. Simple physical labor is God’s work no less
than the formulation of theological truth. Think of the
supposedly menial work of housecleaning. Consider that if you
do not do it—or hire someone else to do it—you will
eventually get sick and die fromthe germs, viruses, and
infections that will breed in your home. The material creation
was made by God to be developed, cultivated, and cared for in
an endless number of ways through human labor. But even the
simplest of these ways is important. Without themall, human
life cannot flourish.
Mike, a friend of Katherine’s, is a doorman in New York
City. He is one of fifteen doormen serving a large Manhattan
co-op; his apartment building is home to about one hundred
families. Now in his early sixties, Mike emigrated to the U.S.
fromCroatia as a young man and worked in many kinds of jobs,
fromthe restaurant business to manual labor. He has been a
doorman in the building for twenty years and is clearly
distinctive in his attitude toward his work. To Mike it’s far from
just a job. He cares about the people in the building and takes
pride in helping with loading, finding parking spaces, and
welcoming guests. He sets the standard for keeping the lobby
and front of the building clean and attractive.
When asked what makes himdrop what he’s doing to get
to the curb in time to help unload a resident’s car after a
weekend away he responds, “That’s my job” or “They needed
help.” Why does he remember the name of every child?
“Because they live here.” At one point, to the question, “But
why do you work so hard at every part of this job?” he replied,
“I don’t know . . . it’s just what I need to be able to look at
myself in the mirror in the morning. I couldn’t live with myself if
I didn’t try my best every day.” He appears to work out of
gratefulness for the job and for his life. He is glad to be in this
country and for the opportunities it has given him.
Most of the people Mike serves are professionals or
businesspeople who are probably glad not to be doormen.
Some might even find the work of a doorman demeaning if they
had to do it themselves. But Mike’s attitude shows that he
recognizes the inherent dignity of the work he is doing; and in
this, he brings out its goodness and worth.
The Material World Matters
All work has dignity because it reflects God’s image in us, and
also because the material creation we are called to care for is
good. The Greeks saw death as a friend, because it liberated us
fromthe prison of physical life. The Bible sees death not as a
friend, but as an enemy (1 Corinthians 15:26), because the
created world is a brilliant and beautiful good (Genesis 1:31),
destined to exist forever (Revelation 22:1–5). Indeed, the
biblical doctrine of creation harmonizes with the doctrine of the
incarnation (in which God takes upon himself a human body)
and of the resurrection (in which God redeems not just the soul
but the body) to show how deeply “pro-physical” Christianity
is. For Christians, even our ultimate future is a physical one.
Some views of reality see the spiritual as more real and true
than the physical; other, more naturalistic views see the
spiritual as illusory and the physical as the only thing real; but
neither is true of the Bible.
We acknowledge that the world is good. It is not the
temporary theater for our individualsalvation stories, after
which we go to live disembodied lives in a different dimension.
According to the Bible, this world is the forerunner of the new
heavens and new earth, which will be purified, restored, and
enhanced at the “renewal of all things” (Matthew 19:28;
Romans 8:19–25). No other religion envisions matter and spirit
living together in integrity forever. And so birds flying and
oceans roaring and people eating, walking, and loving are
permanently good things.
As we have seen, this means that Christians cannot look
down on labor involving more intimate contact with the
material world. Caring for and cultivating this material world
has worth, even if it means cutting the grass. This also means
that “secular” work has no less dignity and nobility than the
“sacred” work of ministry. We are both body and soul, and the
biblical ideal of shalom includes both physical thriving as well
as spiritual. “Food that nourishes, roofs that hold out the rain,
shade that protects fromthe heat of the sun. . . . the
satisfaction of the material needs and desires of men and
women . . . when businesses produce material things that
enhance the welfare of the community, they are engaged in
work that matters to God.”
48
In Psalm65, verses 9–10 and Psalm104, verse 30 we find
God cultivating the ground by watering it through rain
showers, and, through his Holy Spirit, “renewing the face of
the ground.” However, in John 16, verses 8–11, the Holy Spirit
is said to convict and convince people of sin and God’s
judgment—which is something a preacher does. So here we
have God’s Spirit both gardening and preaching the gospel.
Both are God’s work. How can we say one kind of work is high
and noble and the other low and debasing?
We have an excellent foundation if we understand the
goodness of creation and the dignity of work. We work in a
wondrous world that is designed at least partly for our
pleasure. The author of Genesis tells us we should experience
awe as we stand before the richness of the creation, for it teems
with life. God seems to delight in diversity and creativity. Other
places in the Bible speak of God’s creative activity as being
motivated by the sheer delight of creating (see Proverbs 8:27–
31). This, too, is part of God’s plan for what our work should be
about, and what it would still be about if we had not
experienced the fall, which marred everything including our
labor.
We were built for work and the dignity it gives us as human
beings, regardless of its status or pay. The practical
implications of this principle are far-reaching. We have the
freedomto seek work that suits our gifts and passions. We can
be open to greater opportunities for work when the economy is
weak and jobs are less plentiful. We no longer have any basis
for condescension or superiority; nor is there any basis for
envy or feelings of infidelity. And every Christian should be
able to identify, with conviction and satisfaction, the ways in
which his or her work participates with God in his creativity
and cultivation. To help us do that, we turn to the biblical
understanding of culture.
THREE
Work as Cultivation
God blessed them and said to them, “Be fruitful and
increase in number; fill the earth and subdue it. Rule
over the fish in the sea and the birds in the sky and
over every living creature that moves on the
ground.”
Genesis 1:28
Now the Lord God had planted a garden in the east,
in Eden; and there he put the man he had formed.
The Lord God made all kinds of trees grow out of the
ground—trees that were pleasing to the eye and
good for food. . . . The Lord God took the man and
put him in the Garden of Eden to work it and take
care of it. And the Lord God commanded the man,
“You are free to eat from any tree in the garden; but
you must not eat from the tree of the knowledge of
good and evil, for when you eat from it you will
certainly die.” The Lord God said, “It is not good for
the man to be alone. I will make a helper suitable for
him.” Now the Lord God had formed out of the
ground all the wild animals and all the birds in the
sky. He brought them to the man to see what he
would name them; and whatever the man called
each living creature, that was its name. So the man
gave names to all the livestock, the birds in the sky
and all the wild animals. But for Adam no suitable
helper was found. So the Lord God caused the man
to fall into a deep sleep; and while he was sleeping,
he took one of the man’s ribs and then closed up the
place with flesh. Then the Lord God made a woman
from the rib he had taken out of the man, and he
brought her to the man.
Genesis 2:8–9, 15–22
Filling and Subduing the Earth
Work is our design and our dignity; it is also a way to serve
God through creativity, particularly in the creation of culture.
God put human beings into a garden. Hebrew scholar Derek
Kidner argues that work was prominent among the full range of
delights there: “The earthly paradise . . . is a model of parental
care. The fledgling is sheltered but not smothered: on allsides
discoveries and encounters await himto draw out his powers
of discernment and choice, and there is ample nourishment for
his aesthetic, physical and spiritual appetites; further, there is a
man’s work before himfor body and mind (v. 15, 19).”
49 For our
spiritual growth there was a divine Word to obey (verses 16–
17). For our cultural and creative development there was the
physical work of the tending of the garden (verse 15) and the
mentalstretching and understanding involved in the naming of
the animals (verse 19). Finally, in the creation of Eve and of
marriage, there was the provision for growing the human race
into a fullsociety (verses 19–24). All these endeavors were
given as an elaboration on the overarching job description of
Genesis 1, verse 28—to “fill the earth and subdue it.” This
command has been called the “cultural mandate.” What does it
mean?
First, we are called to “fill the earth”—to increase in
number. While God usually says of plants and animals “let
them” multiply (verses 11, 20a, 20b, 22, and 24), human beings
are not only given a command to do so actively (verse 28a) but
then receive a detailed job description (verses 28b–29). In other
words, only humans are given multiplication as a task to fulfill
with intention. But why would this be a job—isn’t it just a
natural process? Not exactly. Human beings “filling the earth”
means something far than plants and animals filling the earth. It
means civilization, not just procreation. We get the sense that
God does not want merely more individuals of the human
species; he also wants the world to be filled with a human
society. He could have just spoken the word and created
millions of people in thousands of human settlements, but he
didn’t. He made it our job to develop and build this society.
Second, we are called to “rule” the rest of creation and even
to “subdue” it. What does that mean? The word “subdue”
might be read to imply that the forces of nature were
adversarial and needed to be conquered in some way. Some
have complained that this text gives human beings a license to
exploit nature. But that is not what it is talking about.50
Remember that this mandate is given before the fall, before
nature becomes subject to decay (Romans 8:17–27) and brings
up thorns along with fruit (Genesis 3:17–19). There is still a
primeval harmony within creation that no longer exists in the
same way after the fall. So there is no violent intent to
“subduing” the earth. Instead, “ruling” the world as God’s
image bearers should be seen as stewardship or trusteeship.
God owns the world, but he has put it under our care to
cultivate it. It is definitely not a mandate to treat the world and
its resources as if they are ours to use, exploit, and discard as
we wish.
Nevertheless, the word translated as “subdue” is a strong
word that means real assertion of will. That is God’s stance
toward creation; when he first creates the material world, he
does not have it spring into being all ready-made. Rather, it is
“formless” and “empty” (1:2). God then addresses these
conditions progressively during Genesis 1—through his work.
He gives the world form. Where it is unshaped and
undifferentiated, he distinguishes and elaborates. He takes the
general and separates it into particulars, for example,
“separating” sky fromsea (1:7) and light fromdarkness (1:4).
We even see this love of diversity in God’s creation of Eve.
God could easily have created humanity in only one formbut
instead created us in two genders, different and
complementary, yet equal. The creation of Adamand Eve as
gendered beings leads to biological procreation, another way
in which we are, as beings in his image, carrying on the work he
began at the beginning. And where things are empty, God fills
them. On the first three days he creates realms (heavens, sky
and waters, earth), and on the second three days he fills each
realmwith inhabitants (sun, moon and stars, birds and fish,
animals and humans).
So the word “subdue” indicates that even in its original,
unfallen form, God made the world to need work. He made it
such that even he had to work for it to become what he
designed it to be, to bring forth all its riches and potential. It is
no coincidence that in Genesis 1, verse 28 God tells us to
follow himin doing the same things that he has been doing—
filling and subduing.
Culture Making with God
Philosopher Al Wolters writes:
The earth had been completely unformed and empty;
in the six-day process of development God had
formed it and filled it—but not completely. People
must now carry on the work of development: by
being fruitful they fill it even more; by subduing it
they must formit even more . . . as God’s
representatives, [we] carry on where God left off. But
this is now to be a human development of the earth.
The human race will fill the earth with its own kind,
and it will formthe earth for its own kind. Fromnow
on the development of the created earth will be
societal and cultural in nature.51
If we are to be God’s image-bearers with regard to creation,
then we will carry on his pattern of work. His world is not
hostile, so that it needs to be beaten down like an enemy.
Rather, its potential is undeveloped, so it needs to be
cultivated like a garden. So we are not to relate to the world as
park rangers, whose job is not to change their space, but to
preserve things as they are. Nor are we to “pave over the
garden” of the created world to make a parking lot. No, we are
to be gardeners who take an active stance toward their charge.
They do not leave the land as it is. They rearrange it in order to
make it most fruitful, to draw the potentialities for growth and
development out of the soil. They dig up the ground and
rearrange it with a goal in mind: to rearrange the raw material of
the garden so that it produces food, flowers, and beauty. And
that is the pattern for all work. It is creative and assertive. It is
rearranging the raw material of God’s creation in such a way
that it helps the world in general, and people in particular,
thrive and flourish.
This pattern is found in all kinds of work. Farming takes the
physical material of soil and seed and produces food. Music
takes the physics of sound and rearranges it into something
beautiful and thrilling that brings meaning to life. When we
take fabric and make a piece of clothing, when we push a
broomand clean up a room, when we use technology to
harness the forces of electricity, when we take an unformed,
naïve human mind and teach it a subject, when we teach a
couple how to resolve their relational disputes, when we take
simple materials and turn theminto a poignant work of art—we
are continuing God’s work of forming, filling, and subduing.
Whenever we bring order out of chaos, whenever we draw out
creative potential, whenever we elaborate and “unfold”
creation beyond where it was when we found it, we are
following God’s pattern of creative cultural development. In
fact, our word “culture” comes fromthis idea of cultivation.
Just as he subdued the earth in his work of creation, so he calls
us now to labor as his representatives in a continuation and
extension of that work of subduing.
At Redeemer we try to encourage our entrepreneurs—
those who seek to create value out of the resources at their
disposal to develop something new and innovative. One of
those is James Tufenkian, who spoke at our annual forumfor
entrepreneurs in 2008. After developing several other
businesses, James started making and distributing artisanal
jams in 2005. He had been working in Armenia and was
frustrated by the poverty and waste in that country. Vast areas
of the country produced wonderful fruit, which were marketed
and enjoyed in season, but large quantities were lost because
of poor shipping and storage. He and a partner decided to
launch a fruit preserve business and turn a seasonal rural
business into a year-round venture. Harvest Song fruit
preserves now win international awards for excellence and are
sold around the world, because of the climate in which they’re
grown and the method through which they’re preserved.
According to James, one of his lifelong and faith-derived
values is “making beautiful things of enduring value.”
52
In fact,
after studying God’s work of forming and filling the earth and
then looking back on it and saying “It was good,” James had
an epiphany. With delight he exclaimed, “God doesn’t make
junk. I don’t make junk!” A biblical understanding of work
energizes our desire to create value fromthe resources
available to us. Recognizing the God who supplies our
resources, and who gives us the privilege of joining in as
cocultivators, helps us enter into our work with a relentless
spirit of creativity.
Mark Noll writes in The Scandal of the Evangelical Mind,
Who, after all, made the world of nature, and then
made possible the development of sciences through
which we find out more about nature? Who formed
the universe of human interactions, and so provided
the raw material for politics, economics, sociology,
and history? Who is the source of harmony, form,
and narrative pattern, and so lies behind all artistic
and literary possibilities? Who created the human
mind in such a way that it could grasp the endless
realities of nature, of human interactions, of beauty,
and so make possible the theories of such matters by
philosophers and psychologists? Who moment by
moment sustains the natural world, the world of
human interactions, and the harmonies of existence?
Who maintains moment by moment the connections
between what is in our minds and what is in the world
beyond our minds? The answer in every case is the
same—God did it. And God does it.53
The naming of the animals in chapter 2, verses 19–20 is an
invitation to enter into his creativity. Why didn’t God just
name the animals himself? After all, in Genesis 1, God names
things, “calling” the light “Day” and the darkness “Night”—so
he was clearly capable of naming the animals as well. Yet he
invites us to continue his work of developing creation, to
develop all the capacities of human and physical nature to
build a civilization that glorifies him. Through our work we
bring order out of chaos, create new entities, exploit the
patterns of creation, and interweave the human community. So
whether splicing a gene or doing brain surgery or collecting the
rubbish or painting a picture, our work further develops,
maintains, or repairs the fabric of the world. In this way, we
connect our work to God’s work.
All Work Is Culture Making
Fuller Seminary president Richard Mouw once addressed a
number of bankers in New York City. He pointed themto
Genesis and showed that God was a creator/investor who made
the world as a home for all kinds of creativity. Mouw urged his
audience to think of God as an investment banker. He
leveraged his resources to create a whole world of new life. In
the same way, what if you see a human need not being met,
you see a talent or resource that can meet that need, and you
then invest your resources—at your risk and cost—so that the
need is met and the result is new jobs, new products, and
better quality of life? What you are doing, Mouw concluded, is
actually God-like.
After the address, many in the audience said, “Could you
talk to my minister about this? He thinks that all I care about is
making money.” Indeed, not all business initiatives serve the
common good.54 But so many ministers assume that investors
and entrepreneurs are solely out to make money without regard
for advancing the common good. If ministers don’t yet see
business as a way of making culture and of cultivating
creation, they will fail to support, appreciate, and properly lead
many members of their congregation.
This aspect of the biblical understanding of work gives
vision and meaning not only to ambitious endeavors, but even
to the most commonplace ones; for it is equally necessary to
cultivate creation in everyday ways. In his seminal and
accessible book Culture-Making: Recovering Our Creative
Calling, Andy Crouch reminds us that our work is important
on any scale, whether grand or modest. Andy describes the
impact made by his wife, Catherine, a professor of physics:
In her work as a professor of physics, Catherine can
do much to shape the culture of her courses and her
research lab. In the somewhat sterile and
technological environment of a laboratory, she can
play classical music to create an atmosphere of
creativity and beauty. She can shape the way her
students respond to exciting and disappointing
results, and can model both hard work and good rest
rather than frantic work and fitful procrastination. By
bringing her children with her to work occasionally
she can create a culture where family is not an
interruption fromwork, and where research and
teaching are natural parts of a mother’s life; by
inviting her students into our home she can show
that she values themas persons, not just as units of
research productivity. At the smallscale of her
laboratory and classroom, she has real ability to
reshape the world.55
No everyday work lacks the dignity of being patterned after
God’s own work, yet no business megadeal or public policy
initiative is so lofty that it can transcend God’s patterns and
limitations for work. What’s more God has not left us alone to
discover how or why we are to cultivate his creation; instead,
he gives us a clear purpose for our work and faithfully calls us
into it.
FOUR
Work as Service
Nevertheless, each person should live as a believer
in whatever situation the Lord has assigned to them,
just as God has called them. This is the rule I lay
down in all the churches.
1 Corinthians 7:17
Called and Assigned
Mike Ullman, former CEO of JCPenney, tells of a conversation
he had with Starbucks founder Howard Schultz when he was
first offered the JCPenney position. Mike had retired froma
long and successful career in retail management a few years
before and was reluctant to get back into the business. But
Schultz said to Ullman, “This opportunity is made for you.
They need to put service back into the mission of that
company, and you’re the guy to do it.” He didn’t need the
money or the recognition, but he agreed to take the role
because he saw an opportunity to reorient twenty-five
thousand retail employees to seeing that their work matters and
that serving their customers is an honorable career. In short, he
believed that God called himto a particular position of service.
We have been looking at the book of Genesis to
understand the design, dignity, and pattern of work, but it is in
the New Testament and particularly in the writings of Paul that
we gain more insight into how God provides purpose for our
work by calling us to serve the world.
Let’s look at the biblical use of the termoften translated as
“calling.” In the letters of the New Testament the Greek word
for “to call” (kaleo) usually describes God’s summons to men
and women into saving faith and union with his Son (Romans
8:30; 1 Corinthians 1:9). It is also a call to serve himby reaching
the world with his message (1 Peter 2:9–10). God’s calling has
not only an individual aspect but also a communal one. It
brings you into a relationship not only with him, but also with a
body of believers (1 Corinthians 1:9; Ephesians 1:1–4;
Colossians 3:15). Indeed, the very Greek word for church —ekklesia—literally means the “ones called out.”
In 1 Corinthians chapter 7, Paul counsels readers that when
they become Christians it is unnecessary to change what they
are currently doing in life—their maritalstate, job, or social
station—in order to live their lives before God in a way that
pleases him. In verse 17, Paul directs, “Only let each person
lead the life that the Lord has assigned to him, and to which
God has called him. This is my rule in all the churches.”
57
Here Paul uses two religiously freighted words to describe
ordinary work. Elsewhere, Paul has spoken of God calling
people into a saving relationship with him, and assigning them
spiritual gifts to do ministry and build up the Christian
community (Romans 12:3 and 2 Corinthians 10:13). Paul uses
these same two words here when he says that every Christian
should remain in the work God has “assigned to him, and to
which God has called him.” Yet Paul is not referring in this
case to church ministries, but to common social and economic
tasks—“secular jobs,” we might say—and naming themGod’s
callings and assignments.57 The implication is clear:Just as
God equips Christians for building up the Body of Christ, so he
also equips all people with talents and gifts for various kinds of
work, for the purpose of building up the human community.58
Biblicalscholar Anthony Thiselton writes about this passage:
“This Pauline concept of call and service varies greatly from
that of secular modernity, which gives a privileged place to
‘autonomy,’ and fromthat of secular postmodernity, which
gives privilege to self-fulfillment and to power interests. . . . [It]
gives this section [of Paul’s writing] fresh relevance to the
present.”
59
Thiselton’s insight recalls the quote by Robert Bellah cited
in our introduction. Bellah called us to recover the idea that
work is a “vocation” or calling, “a contribution to the good of
all and not merely . . . a means to one’s own advancement,” to
one’s self-fulfillment and power.60 Remember that something
can be a vocation or calling only if some other party calls you
to do it, and you do it for their sake rather than for your own.
Our daily work can be a calling only if it is reconceived as
God’s assignment to serve others. And that is exactly how the
Bible teaches us to view work.
At our church we have many high-achieving young people
who are recruited out of college or business school to work in
the financialservices industry. Lured by the recruiting process,
signing bonuses, and compensation packages that far exceed
those of other professions or industries, many of these young
people barely consider other vocational alternatives. For
decades these jobs have offered status and financialsecurity
beyond compare. In the face of this kind of opportunity, how is
a committed Christian supposed to think objectively about his
or her “calling”?
Certainly some do sense that their job in financialsales,
trading, private equity, public finance, or a related area is a way
for themto offer their unique capabilities in service to God and
others. Some, however, after a few years on Wall Street,
determine that their strengths and passions are more suited to
another vocation. Jill Lamar, for example, worked several years
at Merrill Lynch before deciding she needed to make a change.
A lover of books and a good writer herself, she decided to
switch to publishing, starting again at the very bottomin pay
and position. She wrestled with the fact that the opportunity to
make a lot of money didn’t necessarily mean that banking was
the vocation she should continue to pursue. She tried to think
about how she could best use her gifts and passion to serve
instead. Her decision created quite a flurry, even in the church!
Christians should be aware of this revolutionary
understanding of the purpose of their work in the world. We
are not to choose jobs and conduct our work to fulfill
ourselves and accrue power, for being called by God to do
something is empowering enough. We are to see work as a way
of service to God and our neighbor, and so we should both
choose and conduct our work in accordance with that purpose.
The question regarding our choice of work is no longer “What
will make me the most money and give me the most status?”
The question must now be “How, with my existing abilities and
opportunities, can I be of greatest service to other people,
knowing what I do of God’s will and of human need?”
Jill took this last question very seriously. In her subsequent
years in publishing, she found that she was good at editing
and at discovering new writers. She grew in her passion for
giving the world good stories to read. Sometimes the stories
reflected her biblical way of thinking about the world, but
sometimes they did not. She was looking for excellence.
Eventually she directed a wonderful programfor Barnes &
Noble called Discover Great New Writers. Through this
initiative she was able to give worthy new authors a chance to
find a broader audience of readers.
Notice something counterintuitive about the two questions
on the previous page: It is the latter that will lead us to a more
sustainable motivation for discipline and excellence at work. If
the point of work is to serve and exalt ourselves, then our work
inevitably becomes less about the work and more about us.
Our aggressiveness will eventually become abuse, our drive
will become burnout, and our self-sufficiency will become selfloathing. But if the purpose of work is to serve and exalt
something beyond ourselves, then we actually have a better
reason to deploy our talent, ambition, and entrepreneurial vigor —and we are more likely to be successful in the long run, even
by the world’s definition.
Vocation and the “Masks of God”
No one took hold of the teaching of the first book of
Corinthians, chapter 7 more powerfully than Martin Luther.
Luther translated the word “calling” in these verses as Beruf in
German, the word for “occupation,” and mounted a polemic
against the view of vocation prevalent in the medieval
church.61 The church at that time understood itself as the
entirety of God’s kingdomon earth,62 and therefore only work
in and for the church could qualify as God’s work. This meant
that the only way to be called by God into service was as a
monk, priest, or nun. They were called “the spiritual estate,”
everyone else’s work was worldly, and secular labor was seen
as akin to the demeaning necessity that the Greeks saw in
manual labor.63 Luther attacked this idea forcefully in his
treatise To the Christian Nobility of the German Nation:
It is pure invention [fiction] that Pope, bishops,
priests, and monks are called the “spiritual estate”
while princes, lords, artisans, and farmers are called
the “temporal estate.” This is indeed a piece of deceit
and hypocrisy. Yet no one need be intimidated by it,
and that for this reason: all Christians are truly of
the spiritual estate, and there is no difference among
themexcept that of office. . . . We are all consecrated
priests by baptism, as St. Peter says: “You are a royal
priesthood and a priestly realm” (1 Pet. 2:9). The
Apocalypse says: “Thou hast made us to be kings
and priests by thy blood” (Rev. 5:9–10).64
Luther is arguing here that God calls every Christian
equally to their work. In his exposition of Psalm147, Luther
lays out his basic idea of vocation, explaining why this is so.
He looks at verse 13, which assures a city that “God
strengthens the bars of your gates.”
65 Luther asks how God
can strengthen the bars—provide for the security and safety—
of a city. He answers, “By the word ‘bars’ we must understand
not only the iron bar that a smith can make, but . . . everything
else that helps to protect us, such as good government, good
city ordinances, good order . . . and wise rulers. . . . this is a gift
of God.”
66 How does God give a city security? Isn’t it through
lawmakers, police officers, and those working in government
and politics? So God cares for our civic needs through the
work of others, whomhe calls to that work.
In Luther’s Large Catechism, when he addresses the
petition in the Lord’s Prayer asking God to give us our “daily
bread,” Luther says that “when you pray for ‘daily bread’ you
are praying for everything that contributes to your having and
enjoying your daily bread. . . . You must open up and expand
your thinking, so that it reaches not only as far as the flour bin
and baking oven but also out over the broad fields, the
farmlands, and the entire country that produces, processes,
and conveys to us our daily bread and all kinds of
nourishment.”
67 So how does God “feed every living thing”
(Psalm145:16) today? Isn’t it through the farmer, the baker, the
retailer, the website programmer, the truck driver, and all who
contribute to bring us food? Luther writes: “God could easily
give you grain and fruit without your plowing and planting, but
he does not want to do so.”
68
Then he gives an analogy to show us why God works this
way. Parents want to give their children everything they need,
but they also want themto become diligent, conscientious, and
responsible people. So they give their children chores. They
could obviously do the chores better themselves, but that
would not help their children grow in maturity. So parents give
their children what they need—character—through the
diligence required for the chores they assign them. Luther
concludes that God works through our work for the same
reason:
What else is all our work to God—whether in the
fields, in the garden, in the city, in the house, in war,
or in government—but just such a child’s
performance, by which He wants to give His gifts in
the fields, at home, and everywhere else? These are
the masks of God, behind which He wants to remain
concealed and do all things.69
In his exposition of Psalm147, verse 14, Luther goes on to
ask, How does God “make peace in your borders?” His answer
is, through good neighbors, who practice honesty and
integrity in their daily interactions and who participate in civic
life.70 He even sees maritalsexual relations as part of this
pattern. God could have given us children directly. “He could
give children without using men and women. But He does not
want to do this. Instead, He joins man and woman so that it
appears to be the work of man and woman but He does it under
the cover of such masks.”
71
And so we see what Luther means by God’s vocation. Not
only are the most modest jobs—like plowing a field or digging
a ditch—the “masks” through which God cares for us, but so
are the most basic social roles and tasks, such as voting,
participating in public institutions, and being a father or
mother. These are all God’s callings, all ways of doing God’s
work in the world, all ways through which God distributes his
gifts to us. Even the humblest farmgirl is fulfilling God’s
calling. As Luther preached, “God milks the cows through the
vocation of the milk maids.”
72
Vocation and the Gospel
Luther contributed even more to our subject than this
remarkable idea of all work as God’s vocation. The doctrine of
justification by faith alone—the foundational commitment of
the Protestant Reformation—even more profoundly shapes the
Christian understanding of work. The older medieval view (of
secular work as unimportant and religious work as exalted) was
partially rooted in a misunderstanding regarding salvation
itself. “In Luther’s day,” writes Lee Hardy, “it was generally
held that the monks, by taking the monastic vows and
submitting to the rigors of the cloistered life, could actually
merit special divine favor and thereby make eternalsalvation
secure.”
73 Luther realized, however, that all his exemplary
religious observances and ministry did not free himfromthe
reality that his life fellshort of the righteousness God required.
Then he made his famous discovery in Scripture that
justification was by grace through faith in Christ apart fromany
good works of his own. He had been wrestling with the phrase
“the righteousness of God” because “though I lived as a monk
without reproach, I felt that I was a sinner before God with an
extremely disturbed conscience. I could not believe that he was
placated by my satisfaction [religious work]. . . . Thus I raged
with a fierce and troubled conscience. . . .” He began to
meditate on Romans 1, verses 16–17, where Paulsays that
salvation and the righteousness of God “is by faith.” “Then,”
Luther wrote,
I began to understand that the righteousness of God
is that by which the righteous live by a gift of God,
namely by faith. . . . Here I felt that I was altogether
born again and had entered paradise itself through
open gates. There a totally other face of the entire
Scripture showed itself to me.74
As he observes in that last sentence, when he grasped that
salvation was by grace rather than through any effort of his
own, it made himrethink his whole understanding of Scripture,
including his view of the meaning of work. Luther found two
implications in particular. First, if religious works were crucial to
achieving a good standing with God, then there would always
be a fundamental difference between those in church ministry
and everyone else. But if religious work did absolutely nothing
to earn favor with God, it could no longer be seen as superior
to other forms of labor.
The gospel of salvation through sheer grace holds a
second implication for work. While ancient monks may have
sought salvation through religious works, many modern people
seek a kind of salvation—self-esteemand self-worth—from
career success. This leads us to seek only high-paying, highstatus jobs, and to “worship” themin perverse ways. But the
gospel frees us fromthe relentless pressure of having to prove
ourselves and secure our identity through work, for we are
already proven and secure. It also frees us froma
condescending attitude toward less sophisticated labor and
fromenvy over more exalted work. All work now becomes a
way to love the God who saved us freely; and by extension, a
way to love our neighbor.
So Luther could write about believers: “Even their
seemingly secular works are a worship of God and an
obedience well pleasing to God.”
75 He also said, “Why should
I not therefore freely, joyfully, with all my heart, and with an
eager will . . . give myself as a Christ to my neighbor, just as
Christ offered himself to me . . . since through faith I have an
abundance of all good things in Christ?”
76 Since we already
have in Christ the things other people work for—salvation,
self-worth, a good conscience, and peace—now we may work
simply to love God and our neighbors. It is a sacrifice of joy, a
limitation that offers freedom.
This means, ironically, that Christians who understand
biblical doctrine ought to be the ones who appreciate the work
of non-Christians the most. We know we are saved by grace
alone, and therefore we are not better fathers or mothers, better
artists and businesspersons, than those who do not believe as
we do. Our gospel-trained eyes can see the world ablaze with
the glory of God’s work through the people he has created and
called—in everything fromthe simplest actions, such as
milking a cow, to the most brilliant artistic or historic
achievements.
Work as an Act of Love
This revolutionary way of looking at work gives all work a
common and exalted purpose: to honor God by loving your
neighbors and serving themthrough your work.
Author Dorothy Sayers recounts how many British men
and women stumbled upon something like this understanding
of work during the dark days of World War II:
The habit of thinking about work as something one
does to make money is so ingrained in us that we can
scarcely imagine what a revolutionary change it
would be to think about it instead in terms of the
work done [itself]. . . .77
. . . I believe there is a
Christian doctrine of work, very closely related to the
doctrines of the creative energy of God and the
divine image in man. . . . The essential [modern]
heresy . . . being that work is not the expression of
man’s creative energy in the service of Society, but
only something one does in order to obtain money
and leisure.78
She goes on to explain what happens as a result: “Doctors
practice medicine not primarily to relieve suffering, but to make
a living—the cure of the patient is something that happens on
the way. Lawyers accept briefs not because they have a
passion for justice, but because the law is the profession which
enables themto live.” But during the war many people were
drawn into the army and found a new, surprising sense of
fulfillment in their work. “The reason why men often find
themselves happy and satisfied in the army is that for the first
time in their lives they found themselves doing something, not
for the pay, which is miserable, but for the sake of getting the
thing done.”
79
Sayers was talking about wartime Britain, in which every
person knew that their work was contributing to the very
survival of their nation. But author Lester DeKoster does an
excellent job of showing how indispensible work is for human
life in all times and places:
Work is the formin which we make ourselves useful
to others . . . in which others make themselves useful
to us. We plant [with our work]; God gives the
increase to unify the human race. . . .
[Look at] the chair you are lounging in. . . . Could
you have made it for yourself? . . . How [would you]
get, say, the wood? Go and fell a tree? But only after
first making the tools for that, and putting together
some kind of vehicle to haul the wood, and
constructing a mill to do the lumber and roads to
drive on fromplace to place? In short, a lifetime or
two to make one chair! . . . If we . . . worked not forty
but one-hundred-forty hours per week we couldn’t
make ourselves fromscratch even a fraction of all the
goods and services that we call our own. [Our]
paycheck turns out to buy us the use of far more than
we could possibly make for ourselves in the time it
takes us to earn the check. . . . Work . . . yields far
more in return upon our efforts than our particular
jobs put in. . . .
Imagine that everyone quits working, right now!
What happens? Civilized life quickly melts away.
Food vanishes fromthe shelves, gas dries up at the
pumps, streets are no longer patrolled, and fires burn
themselves out. Communication and transportation
services end, utilities go dead. Those who survive at
all are soon huddled around campfires, sleeping in
caves, clothed in raw animal hides. The difference
between [a wilderness] and culture is simply, work.80
There may be no better way to love your neighbor, whether
you are writing parking tickets, software, or books, than to
simply do your work. But only skillful, competent work will do.
Work as a Ministry of Competence
One of the main ways that you love others in your work is
through the “ministry of competence.” If God’s purpose for
your job is that you serve the human community, then the way
to serve God best is to do the job as well as it can be done.
Dorothy Sayers writes,
The church’s approach to an intelligent carpenter is
usually confined to exhorting himto not be drunk and
disorderly in his leisure hours and to come to church
on Sundays. What the church should be telling himis
this: that the very first demand that his religion makes
upon himis that he should make good tables.81
Let me give a dramatic example of this. On February 24,
1989, United Airlines Flight 811 took off fromHonolulu on its
way to New Zealand. The 747 had climbed to twenty-two
thousand feet when the forward cargo door of the jet blew
open, tearing a huge hole in the side of the plane. Nine
passengers were immediately sucked out of the plane to their
deaths. The two right engines were damaged by flying debris
and taken out of commission. The plane was one hundred miles
fromland. The captain, David Cronin, brought all of his wisdom
and thirty-eight years of piloting experience to bear:
To compensate for the lack of thrust fromthe two
right engines, he struggled to hold the control
column steady with his hands while using his feet to
put pressure on the control floor rudder to stabilize
the plane. His stickiest problem, however, was
deciding how fast to fly. [He] slowed the plane as
close to the stallspeed as possible to keep the air
rushing over the plane fromfurther widening the hole
in the fuselage. Because the hole had changed the
aero-dynamics of the huge craft, the usual data
regarding stallspeed was no longer relevant. The
pilot [knowing this] had to use his best judgment.
Furthermore, since the plane had just taken on
300,000 pounds of fuel for the long flight, it was too
heavy to land without collapsing the landing gear. . . .
Then he encountered a new problem. The wing flaps
used to slow down the plane were not working
properly. . . . He would have to land the plane at 195
miles per hour, compared to the normalspeed of 170
miles per hour. The jet weighed 610,000 pounds, well
above Boeing’s recommended maximumstress load
of 564,000 pounds. Nevertheless, Captain Cronin
made one of the smoothest landings the rest of the
crew could remember, amid the cheers of the
passengers. Airline experts called the landing
miraculous. . . . A few days after the harrowing
experience, an interviewer asked Captain Cronin
about his first thoughts following the loss of the
cargo door. He said, “I said a prayer for my
passengers momentarily and then got back to
business.”
82
Lutheran leader and businessman WilliamDiehl recounts
this inspiring story to make an important point. He writes, “If
laypeople cannot find any spiritual meaning in their work, they
are condemned to living a certain dual life; not connecting
what they do on Sunday morning with what they do the rest of
the week. They need to discover that the very actions of daily
life are spiritual, and enable . . . people to touch God in the
world, not away fromit. Such a spirituality willsay . . . ‘Your
work is your prayer.’”
83
So how do we connect what we do on Sunday morning
with what we do during the rest of the week? How can we
“touch God in the world” through our work? Diehl answers
that the very first way to be sure you are serving God in your
work is to be competent.
When United Airlines Flight 811 got into trouble, the
greatest gift Captain Cronin had for his passengers
was his experience and good judgment. In those
moments of peril, it mattered not to the passengers
how Captain Cronin related to his coworkers or how
he communicated his faith to others. . . . The critical
issue was this: was he competent enough as a pilot to
bring that badly damaged plane in safely. . . .
Through our work we can touch God in a variety of
ways . . . but if the call of the Christian is to
participate in God’s ongoing creative process, the
bedrock of our ministry has to be competency. We
must use our talents in as competent a manner as
possible.
Competency is a basic value. It is not a means to
some other end, such as wealth or position, although
such results may occur.84
The applications of this dictum—that competent work is a
formof love—are many. Those who grasp this understanding
of work willstill desire to succeed but will not be nearly as
driven to overwork or made as despondent by poor results. If it
is true, then if you have to choose between work that benefits
more people and work that pays you more, you should
seriously consider the job that pays less and helps more—
particularly if you can be great at it. It means that all jobs—not
merely so-called helping professions—are fundamentally ways
of loving your neighbor. Christians do not have to do direct
ministry or nonprofit charitable work in order to love others
through their jobs.
In particular, this principle is one of the main ways for us to
find satisfaction in our work, even if our jobs are not, by the
world’s standards, exciting, high paying, and desirable. Even
though, as Luther argues, all work is objectively valuable to
others, it will not be subjectively fulfilling unless you
consciously see and understand your work as a calling to love
your neighbor. John Calvin wrote that “no task will be [seen
as] so sordid and base, provided you obey your calling in it,
that it will not shine and be reckoned very precious in God’s
sight.”
85 Notice that Calvin speaks of “obey[ing] your calling
in it”; that is, consciously seeing your job as God’s calling and
offering the work to him. When you do that, you can be sure
that the splendor of God radiates through any task, whether it
is as commonplace as tilling a garden, or as rarefied as working
on the global trading floor of a bank. As Eric Liddell’s
missionary father exhorts himin Chariots of Fire, “You can
praise the Lord by peeling a spud, if you peel it to perfection.”
Your daily work is ultimately an act of worship to the God
who called and equipped you to do it—no matter what kind of
work it is. In the liner notes to his masterpiece A Love Supreme,
John Coltrane says it beautifully:
This albumis a humble offering to Him. An attempt to
say “THANK YOU GOD” through our work, even as
we do in our hearts and with our tongues. May He
help and strengthen all men in every good endeavor.
PART TWO
Our Problems with Work
FIVE
Work Becomes Fruitless
To the woman he said, “I will make your pains in
childbearing very severe; with painful labor you
will give birth to children. Your desire will be for
your husband, and he will rule over you.”
To Adam he said, “Because you listened to your wife
and ate fruit from the tree about which I commanded
you, ‘You must not eat from it,’ cursed is the ground
because of you; through painful toil you will eat
food from it all the days of your life. It will produce
thorns and thistles for you, and you will eat the
plants of the field. By the sweat of your brow you
will eat your food until you return to the ground,
since from it you were taken; for dust you are and to
dust you will return.”
Genesis 3:16–19
Paradise Lost
We have surveyed the rich biblical view of God’s perfect
design for work. But that is not how we experience it. Everyone
knows that this is a broken, troubled world—shot through with
sickness and death, injustice and selfishness, natural disasters,
and chaos. Since the beginning of time there has been a wide
variety of explanations for why this is so and what to do about
it. At the heart of the Bible’s account is the concept of sin:
man’s rebellion against God and our resulting alienation from
him. The fall of Adamand Eve (and therefore the rest of the
human race) into sin has been disastrous. It has unraveled the
fabric of the entire world—and in no area as profoundly as our
work. The story presented in the Bible is that while God
blessed work to be a glorious use of our gifts and his resources
to prosper the world, it is now also cursed because of
mankind’s fall. Work exists now in a world sustained by God
but disordered by sin. Only if we have some understanding of
how sin distorts work can we hope to counteract its effects and
salvage some of the satisfaction God planned for our work.
In Genesis 2, verse 17, God put Adamand Eve into a garden
paradise and told themthat if they disobeyed himand ate of a
particular tree they would “surely die.” What was so special
about that one tree? The answer is probably nothing, per se.
That is, there was likely nothing magical or unusual about the
tree or the fruit itself; the tree was a test. God was saying, “I
want you to do something for me, not because you understand
why, not because you can see whether it would benefit you or
disadvantage you. I want you to obey me, simply because of
who I am, simply because you love me and trust me more than
anything.”
This command, in fact, contained the essence of all the
biblical commandments that would be laid out to the nation of
Israel, many generations later.86
It was an opportunity for the
human race to voluntarily make our relationship with God the
primary value of our lives and to obey his Word simply
because it was his due. When Adamand Eve disobeyed this
command, they did become “like God,” as the serpent (who
deceived theminto disobedience) said they would. That is,
they put themselves in God’s place; they took upon
themselves the right to decide how they should live and what
was right and wrong for themto do. For themto become “like
God” in this way was catastrophic. As a sailboat is designed
for the water, such that if it runs aground it is damaged and
useless, we human beings “run aground” when we choose to
be our own source of authority. We were designed to know,
serve, and love God supremely—and when we are faithful to
that design, we flourish. But when we instead chose to live for
ourselves, everything began to work backward. After this
turning point the human race began to live against the grain of
the universe, against the grain of our own making and
purpose.87 As Paulsays in Romans 8, the entire world is now
“subject to decay.” The poet W.B. Yeats put it this way:
Things fall apart; the centre cannot hold;
Mere anarchy is loosed upon the world.88
God had warned Adamand Eve that if they ate of the tree,
they would die. Most readers assume that God is speaking of
immediate physical death, so it is surprising to us when Adam
and Eve eat of the tree and they do not slump lifeless to the
ground. But that would happen in due course, for eventual
physicalshutdown is one aspect of the comprehensive death
and decay that now comes to every aspect of human life.
Nothing works now as it should. Sin leads to the disintegration
of every area of life:spiritual, physical, social, cultural,
psychological, temporal, eternal.
This is important to remember, for many Christians tend to
divide the world into “worldly” and “sacred” spaces and
activities, as if sin affects only things out in the world; yet
absolutely every part of human life—soul and body, private
and public, praying and laboring—is affected by sin. Yeats
said that “things fall apart,” and because of sin they do.
Things Fall Apart
A continued look at Genesis 3 shows that as soon as Adam
and Eve sinned against God, they experienced internalshame,
guilt, and brokenness. They suffered the natural consequences
of working against their design. “They realized they were
naked” (verse 7). This is the opposite of verse 25 in chapter 2,
where we read that Adamand Eve had been, as we often put it
today, “naked and unashamed.” Old Testament scholar David
Atkinson writes: “Shame . . . is that sense of unease with
yourself at the heart of your being.”
89 We know there is
something wrong with us, but we can’t admit it or identify it.
There is a deep restlessness, which can take various forms—
guilt and striving to prove ourselves, rebellion and the need to
assert our independence, compliance and the need to please
others. Something is wrong, and we may know the effects, but
we fallshort of understanding the true causes.
Contemporary Western culture tries to account for this
restlessness without recourse to the biblical doctrine of sin.
Psychologists help us understand the part our early
childhoods have played in creating unnecessary shame or a
sense of being unloved. Entertainment distracts us fromour
discomfort. And doing good helps bolster our identity as a
good person. But the Bible locates the root issue as our
separation fromGod.
Another manifestation of this deep unease includes a
mistrust and fear of others. The awareness of a need for
clothing in the biblical account (verse 7: “they . . . made
coverings for themselves”) is much more than a new reticence
about sex. There was a desire to retreat fromwhat could be
called an unself-protective mutuality. Adamand Eve each
became desperate to control what the other knew, to hide and
create facades to block the other’s gaze. This mistrust and fear
quickly led to friction and anger, as it now does in all
relationships.
In his fascinating interview of Adamand Eve in Genesis 3,
verses 10–13, God asks themwhat has happened. Adam
completely avoids the real truth—that he has eaten of the tree —and only complains of his inner unhappiness and shame.
God’s second question is so direct that Adamcannot avoid
naming what he has done, but he immediately deflects the
responsibility away fromhimself to Eve. In turn, Eve deflects to
the serpent. Their hostility and anger are directed not only
toward other creatures but toward God as well. Adamblames
God for his problems—“The woman you put here with me—
she gave me . . . and I ate. . . .” (verse 12). One commentator on
Genesis writes, “In Genesis 3:8 there is an inadequate
awareness of the seriousness of sin, moral perceptions are
clouded, and the self-centered view of values is well beneath
the God-centered view. . . . The blindness of sin is beginning to
take effect. . . . Fromthe moment of the fall, humankind has
suffered frommoralschizophrenia: neither able to deny
sinfulness nor to acknowledge it for what it is.”
90
Genesis 3 shows how sin warps every part of our nature,
every aspect of human living. It begins by distorting the areas
of sex, gender, love, and marriage. God chillingly explains the
impact of sin on the relationship between husbands and wives.
Scholars debate the exact meaning of God’s statement that
now, because of sin, “Your desire will be for your husband,
and he will rule over you” (verse 16); but all agree it means at
least that misunderstanding, frustration, deep conflict, and
unhappiness are now the normin relationships between men
and women.91
The very fabric of the physical world now began to unravel,
and the results are disease, old age, natural disaster, and death
itself (Genesis 3:17–19). Philosopher Al Wolters explains it like
this:
The Bible teaches plainly that Adamand Eve’s fall
into sin was not just an isolated act of disobedience
but an event of catastrophic significance for creation
as a whole. . . . The effects of sin touch all of creation;
no created thing is in principle untouched by the
corrosive effects of the fall. Whether we look at
societalstructures such as the state or family, or
cultural pursuits such as art or technology, or bodily
functions such as sexuality or eating, or anything at
all within the wide scope of creation, we discover that
the good handiwork of God has been drawn into the
sphere of mutiny against God. “The whole creation,”
Paul writes, “has been groaning . . . is subject to
bondage and decay.”
92
Genesis 3 is an ancient text, filled with rich theology in
narrative form. But it could not be more relevant and practical
to life today. It goes for the jugular, as if to say, “Do you find
the two great tasks in life—love and work—to be
excruciatingly hard? This explains why.” God ties the pain of
love and marriage and the pain of work very closely together in
these verses. Both childbearing and farming are now called
“painful labor.” Theologian W.R. Forrester writes, “in language
after language the same word is used for toil and childbearing,
e.g. ‘labor’ and ‘travail.’”
93 So companies assemble teams to
work furiously for months or years to “give birth” to new
products or ventures, which may die a quick death in the
marketplace. Star football players often suffer the effects of
injuries throughout their lives. Brilliant entrepreneurs like Steve
Jobs get thrown out of companies when times get tough. (Few
get invited back, like Jobs was.) The weeds, or the computer
viruses, or the corruption scandals, come back with a
vengeance. Research into the properties of the atombecomes
the basis for the atomic bomb. In other words, work, even when
it bears fruit, is always painful, often miscarries, and sometimes
kills us.
Thorns and Thistles
Sin affects not only personal and private life, but also public
and social life, and in particular work. As we have seen in
Genesis 1 and 2, God made us for work, yet now we learn that
work becomes, under sin, “painful toil” (verse 17). Work is not
itself a curse, but it now lies with all other aspects of human life
under the curse of sin. “Thorns and thistles” will come up as
we seek to grow food (verse 18). When we remember that
gardening is representative of all kinds of human labor and
culture building, this is a statement that all work and human
effort will be marked by frustration and a lack of fulfillment.
“Part of the curse of work in a fallen world is its frequent
fruitlessness.”
94
What do we mean when we say work is fruitless? We mean
that, in all our work, we will be able to envision far more than
we can accomplish, both because of a lack of ability and
because of resistance in the environment around us. The
experience of work will include pain, conflict, envy, and fatigue,
and not all our goals will be met. For example, you may have an
aspiration to do a certain kind of work and performat a certain
level of skill and quality, but you may never even get the
opportunity to do the work you want, or if you do, you may
not be able to do it as well as it needs to be done. Your
conflicts with others in the work environment willsap your
confidence and undermine your productivity.
But even during times when you are satisfied with the
quality of your work, you may be bitterly disappointed with the
results. You may find that circumstances conspire to neutralize
any real impact fromyour project. You may have mastered the
skills of farming, but famine or flood or war come in and
destroy your harvest. You may have become an accomplished
singer, but you are not able to generate an income fromyour
talent because you are skillful in music but not in selfpromotion, or because ruthless rivals find ways of blackballing
you. And so you have to give up your musical career.
You may hope to make a real contribution to your
organization or to work with distinction as an expert in your
field. You may aspire to “change the world”—make a major
improvement in human society, or have a lasting impact on the
culture. Most people achieve very few of these goals in their
lifetimes, and even those who seemfroma distance to lead
charmed work lives willsense that their true aspirations are
thwarted as often as they are reached. And for all of us, more
often than we would like to admit, we are the ones doing the
thwarting.
Imagine you are on a hospital administration teamwith a
vision for making epochal advances in patient care. You make a
series of significant changes to how your medicalstaff sees
and treats patients. Initial responses by patients are highly
positive, and so are some key metrics on incidence of patient
harm, such as blood infections, surgicalsite infections, and
medication errors. But the various new accountability measures —such as department report cards and “safety dashboards”—
have many of your medicalstaff up in arms. They complain that
the pressure is too great, the measurements are unfair, and an
honest, inadvertent mistake can now ruin a career. You try to
reason with many of the staff, but you begin to get defensive.
In one staff meeting you lose your cool and say that many staff
persons are failing to put the interests of the patients first.
There may be some truth in your statement, but it backfires
badly. Some are furious with your insinuation. Several of your
most respected people leave, and morale takes a sharp dip.
What has happened? Many things. You can look back and
see places where you could have been more careful and
sensitive to the fears of medicalstaff. You could have not
taken the criticismso personally that you spoke unwisely in
some public meetings. So you—and your sin—were part of the
problem. You, to put it starkly, were a thorn. The medicalstaff
in many cases was simply being stubborn and concerned more
about possible blots on their personal records than about the
safety of patients. Underneath everything else there is the
tragic and seemingly unfair fact of life that in medical facilities,
small and virtually unavoidable human errors can ruin or end
lives. The thorns and thistles in this situation stemfrom
alienation fromothers that has its root in the loss of our
relationship with God. So even on our best days, each of us is
working within a systemthat feels stacked against us.
I often feel that I have the best job in the world—for me. I
amdoing what I love to do. We have seen more fruitfulness in
our church’s ministry than I ever expected to see in a lifetime.
But I experience plenty of thorns and thistles. One season I
learned I had thyroid cancer and all but the most basic parts of
my work were put on hold. My wife has had medical
emergencies that thwarted my travel plans or distracted us from
new projects. At times staff members have protested that my
vision was outpacing my ability to lead it or their ability to
implement it. Key leaders in my congregation have moved out
of town just as I was ready to entrust some part of the church
into their care. I’mgrateful to God for the glimpses He’s given
me of what work was intended to be. But daily I amaware of
the maddening encroachment of thorns and thistles in the
patch of the world that has been entrusted to me for this
season.
Accepting Fruitlessness
One of the most vivid depictions of the frustration and
fruitlessness of work is found in Peter Shaffer’s play
Amadeus.95 Antonio Salieri is court composer to the Hapsburg
emperor, and a highly successful writer of operas. He has
power and wealth, and yet he senses the mediocrity of what he
has produced. Then he meets Mozart and hears his music, and
in a flash he stands revealed to himself. He realizes that in
Mozart’s music he is hearing the beauty he has aspired to
create his entire life, but at the same moment, he knows that he
will never be capable of producing it himself. As he looks at a
written score of Mozart’s music, he feels caged, allowed to look
through the bars and perceive but not participate in the glory
he has hungered for. As he stares at the score, he thinks,
“Displace one note and there would be diminishment. Displace
one phrase, and the structure would fall. . . . Here . . . was the
very voice of God! I was staring through the cage of those
meticulous ink-strokes at an absolute, inimitable beauty.”
96
Salieri had to live with the existential frustration of work.
That is, despite his dedication and experience, he wasn’t as
good at composing music as he wanted to be. Yet in terms of
outcomes, he was professionally accomplished, achieved high
status, and enjoyed financialsuccess. Meanwhile, Mozart was
a musical prodigy with abundant gifts, yet he suffered rejection
and poverty. Both Mozart and Salieri had success in some
aspects of their work lives yet experienced deep frustration in
others.
It is important for us to understand and hold in tension
what the Bible says about creation and about the fall—about
God’s plan for work, and also about the problems of work in a
broken world. As products of the Depression and two world
wars, my parents’ and grandparents’ generations were grateful
to have work of any kind because it helped themand their
family survive. But members of my children’s generation are
utterly dissimilar. They insist that work be fulfilling and fruitful,
that it fully fit their talents and their dreams, and that it “do
something amazing for the world,” as one Google executive
described his company’s mission.97 Andy Crouch observes,
“We moderns certainly can’t be accused of lacking selfconfidence. The explosion of books about ‘changing the
world’ fits our self-image.”
98 While the circumstances shaping
my parents’ generation perhaps gave thema lower view of
work than the one found in the Bible’s description of creation,
so my children’s generation has a more naïve and utopian view
of work than is suggested by the Bible in its description of the
world’s fall into sin.
In light of all this, was Salieri missing his calling? Should he
have taken up work further afield fromcomposition, in the hope
that he would not have been as frustrated? I think many
contemporary young adults actually might have given himthat
advice; and they would have been wrong. Salieri was called to
contribute to the world as a concert composer—in fact, he
produced music that we still have today. The same may well be
true to you. Just because you cannot realize your highest
aspirations in work does not mean you have chosen wrongly,
or are not called to your profession, or that you should spend
your life looking for the perfect career that is devoid of
frustration. That would be a fruitless search for anyone. You
should expect to be regularly frustrated in your work even
though you may be in exactly the right vocation.
Nonetheless, was Salieri asking the right questions? Was
he justified in longing for an experience of work that might
afford himthe deep satisfaction of greatness? Of course he
was; and while such a line of thought might have seemed selfindulgent to my parents’ generation, we know dozens of
people for whomthose questions led to a new vocation. A
young woman in our church was recruited out of college to
work on Wall Street. She was one of the leaders of our
church’s ministry to financialservices professionals. Despite
success and financial rewards, she made the decision several
years into her job that what she really wanted to do with her
life was to become a nurse. She walked away fromthe high
salary to go to nursing school and now has begun to practice.
In a world where people have on average three to four different
careers in their work lives, it is perfectly natural that changing
careers may be necessary to maximize fruitfulness. God can—
and often does—change what he calls us to do.
Deep Consolation
Because of the nature of God’s creation, we need work for our
happiness. And because of God’s intentions for our work—to
contribute to the flourishing of the world—we have glimpses
of what we could accomplish. But because of the fall of the
human race, our work is also profoundly frustrating, never as
fruitful as we want, and often a complete failure. This is why so
many people inhabit the extremes of idealismand cynicism—or
even ricochet back and forth between those poles. Idealism
says, “Through my work I amgoing to change things, make a
difference, accomplish something new, bring justice to the
world.” Cynicismsays, “Nothing really changes. Don’t get
your hopes up. Do what it takes to make a living. Don’t let
yourself care too much. Get out of it whatever you can.”
Genesis 3, verse 18 tells us not only that “thorns and
thistles” will come out of the ground but also that “you will eat
the plants of the field.” Thorns and food. Work willstill bear
some fruit, though it will always fallshort of its promise. Work
will be both frustrating and fulfilling, and sometimes—just
often enough—human work gives us a glimpse of the beauty
and genius that might have been the routine characteristic of
all our work, and what, by the grace of God, it will be again in
the new heavens and new earth. Tolkien’s dreamand the
resulting story, “Leaf by Niggle,” are simply a depiction of this
hope. Niggle imagined a beautiful tree that he never was able to
produce in paint during his life, so he died weeping that his
picture, the great work of his life, was not completed. No one
would ever see it. And yet, when he got to the heavenly
country—there was the tree! This was Tolkien’s way of
saying, to us as well as to himself, that our deepest aspirations
in work will come to complete fruition in God’s future. Just as
Niggle’s tree survived in all its glory, people will hear Salieri’s
music, and they willsomehow taste the fruit of the project you
are working on right now. There will be work in the paradise of
the future just like there was in the paradise of the past,
because God himself takes joy in his work. In that paradise,
you will be useful in the lives of others to infinite degrees of
joy and satisfaction; you will performwith all the skill you can
imagine.
Christians have, through their hope in God’s story of
redemption for the world he created, a deep consolation that
enables themto work with all their being and never be
ultimately discouraged by the frustrating present reality of this
world, in which thorns grow up when they are trying to coaxup
other things. We accept the fact that in this world our work will
always fallshort, just as we sinners always “fallshort of the
glory of God” (Romans 3:23) because we know that our work in
this life is not the final word.
We call upon this consolation every Christmas, though we
often do not realize what we are saying:
Work Becomes Fruitless
No more let sin or sorrows grow,
Nor thorns infest the ground;
He comes to make his blessings flow
Far as the curse is found,
Far as the curse is found,
Far as, far as the curse is found.99
SIX
Work Becomes Pointless
So I hated life, because the work that is done under
the sun was grievous to me. All of it is meaningless, a
chasing after the wind.
Ecclesiastes 2:17
Under the Sun
We have seen that work in a fallen world can be fruitless; it can
also be pointless. This is another aspect of the alienation
human beings sense in their work. That is, while many workers
are frustrated by unconsummated skills and unfulfilled
aspirations, many others experience no satisfaction or
fulfillment in their work even when they have realized their
aspirations and become successful. One of the most poignant
expressions of the way human work can feelso profoundly
meaningless comes froma very ancient document, the Old
Testament book of Ecclesiastes.
The narrator in the book of Ecclesiastes is called, in
Hebrew, Qoheleth, which can be translated as “the Teacher” or
perhaps even “the Philosopher.” In order to understand what
Ecclesiastes has to say about work, however, we need to take a
moment to understand the literary genre of the book and how
the author gets his points across.
Anyone who reads through Ecclesiastes will be struck by
many things that appear to contradict the rest of the Bible.
While the Bible everywhere challenges people to live
thoroughly wise and righteous lives, Ecclesiastes seems to
warn about being “too righteous” or too wicked and
commends a middle road—not too moral or too immoral, not
too wise or too foolish (Ecclesiastes 7:15–17). How do we
explain statements like this?
Old Testament scholar Tremper Longman points out that
there was a literary format that time called “fictional
autobiography.”
100
In this form, the writer could introduce a
fictional character, give a description of his or her life’s course,
and then conclude with general insights and teachings drawn
fromthe case study of the recounted life. And indeed in
Ecclesiastes it is possible to discern two narrators or voices.
First the writer of the prologue introduces the fictional
character Qoheleth, who in turn speaks in the first person
about all the ways he sought to find fulfillment and meaning in
life under the sun. The term“under the sun” is crucial to
understanding the perspective of the Philosopher. In general, it
refers to life in this world considered in and of itself, apart from
any greater or eternal reality. The quest of the Philosopher is to
have a meaningful life based solely on what can be found
within the confines of this material world—achievement,
pleasure, and learning.101 Finally, the original writer speaks in
his own voice again and does an evaluation in the epilogue
(12:8–14). Thus the writer can dramatize his main themes by
depicting the wisest, richest, most gifted man possible, who
nonetheless could not find fulfillment in this life.102
Some books of the Bible are like listening to a pastor giving
counsel on how to live (the book of James in the New
Testament, for example, or Proverbs in the Old Testament). But
reading Ecclesiastes is like sitting in a philosophy class with a
professor who provokes you with thorny Socratic questions
and strange case studies, who pulls you into a dialogue to lead
you to discover truth for yourself. The Philosopher pushes
you to look at the foundations of your life and to ask the basic
questions that we might otherwise avoid: “Is there any
meaning to your life? What are you really doing it all for? Why
is there so much wrong with the world? How will you cope with
it?”
The author of Ecclesiastes is using the character of the
Philosopher to push readers toward an understanding of the
transcendent uniqueness and necessity of God. Nothing within
this world is sufficient basis for a meaningful life here. If we
base our lives on work and achievement, on love and pleasure,
or on knowledge and learning, our existence becomes anxious
and fragile—because circumstances in life are always
threatening the very foundation of our lives, and death
inevitably strips us of everything we hold dear. Ecclesiastes is
an argument that existential dependence on a gracious Creator
God—not only abstract belief—is a precondition for an
unshakeable, purposeful life.
Katherine Alsdorf, like many who make their way to our
church well into their careers, can relate to all three of these
pursuits:seeking the meaning of life through learning in
college, pursuing pleasure and adventure after that, followed
by an almost desperate thrust into work and career in her
thirties in a full-tilt effort to make life fulfilling. She began to
accumulate accomplishments and even some financial
prosperity, but grew increasingly stressed and even bitter. She
describes her resentment, at the time, of others who were
enjoying the fruits of a good life that they hadn’t fully earned!
Her accomplishments were never enough, and the abundant
benefits were never satisfying. As she would put it, “I couldn’t
handle the idea that it was all meaningless, so I just put my
head down and worked harder.” Eventually, she started to
consider the gospel of Christ because the philosophies of this
world were taking her nowhere. The emptiness of life was
pushing her toward her own understanding of that
transcendent uniqueness of God.
The Meaninglessness of Work
The Philosopher makes his case in stages. The book begins
with what has been called three “life projects,” each an effort to
discover a meaningful life under the sun. The first is a quest to
make sense of life through learning and wisdom(Ecclesiastes
1:12–18; 2:12–16). The second is an effort to make life fulfilling
through the pursuit of pleasure (2:1–11).
The third project that the Philosopher undertakes to chase
away his sense of pointlessness is the pursuit of achievement
through hard work (Ecclesiastes 2:17–26). Having tried to live
for learning and for pleasure, he now tries to live for the
accomplishment of concrete goals and the accrual of wealth
and influence. But in the end he concludes that work cannot,
all by itself, deliver a meaningful life. “So I hated life, because
the work that is done under the sun was grievous to me. All of
it is meaningless, a chasing after the wind” (Ecclesiastes 2:17).
Why does he draw this conclusion?
When we work, we want to make an impact. That can mean
getting personal recognition for our work, or making a
difference in our field, or doing something to make the world a
better place. Nothing is more satisfying than a sense that
through our work we have accomplished some lasting
achievement. But the Philosopher startles us by arguing that
even if you are one of the few people who breaks through and
accomplishes all you hope for, it’s all for nothing, for in the end
there are no lasting achievements. “I hated all the things I had
toiled for under the sun, because I must leave themto the one
who comes after me. And who knows whether that person will
be wise or foolish? Yet they will have control over all the fruit
of my toil into which I have poured my effort and skill under
the sun. This too is meaningless. So my heart began to despair
over all my toilsome labor under the sun” (Ecclesiastes 2:18–
20).
Whether quickly or slowly, all the results of our toil will be
wiped away by history. The person who takes the business
after you, or who picks up the cause or organization after you,
may undo all you have done. Of course, some history makers
have brought inventions or innovations that stay with the
human race for a long time, but those persons are very rare,
and of course eventually even the most famous “will not be
long remembered” (Ecclesiastes 2:16) since everything and
every accomplishment under the sun will be ground to dust in
the end—even civilization itself. All work, even the most
historic, will eventually be forgotten and its impact totally
neutralized (1:3–11).
In short even if your work is not fruitless, it is ultimately
pointless if life “under the sun” is all there is.
The Alienation of Work
Work under the sun is meaningless because it does not last;
and so it takes away our hope in the future. It also alienates us
fromGod and fromone another, so it takes away our joy in the
present.
We may again be sympathetic to Antonio Salieri within the
narrative of the play Amadeus. Here is a man who aspires to
create extraordinary music but instead is given modest talents.
Being near Mozart shows himhow ordinary his music is. He
asks God to fill himwith creative brilliance, but to no avail.
Salieri becomes furious with God. So he says to God, “From
now on we are enemies, You and I . . . Because You will not
enter me, with all my need for you; because You scorn my
attempts. . . . You are unjust, unfair, unkind. . . .” Salieri turns
bitter against God and does what he can to destroy Mozart,
God’s instrument.
Was God being unfair and unkind? If he was, he wasn’t
being so only to Salieri. Arguably, only a handful of musicians
in all of history have been given gifts like Mozart had. No,
Salieri’s response was unusually dark and desperate because
he had built his entire life on his dreamof fame through music.
He had begun by trying to put God in his debt:
Whilst my father prayed earnestly to God to protect
commerce, I would offer up secretly the proudest
prayer a boy could think of. Lord, make me a great
composer! Let me celebrate your glory through music —and be celebrated myself! Make me famous
through the world, dear God! Make me immortal!
After I die let people speak my name forever with love
for what I wrote!103
The word “immortal” is the key to what was going on in
Salieri’s heart. His appropriate ambition had become his
misplaced salvation; so his considerable success was not
enough. He experienced not ordinary disappointment, but
alienation and heartbreak, because he was not as good as
Mozart.
“What do people get for all the toil and anxious striving
with which they labor under the sun? All their days their work
is grief and pain; even at night their minds do not rest. This too
is meaningless” (Ecclesiastes 2:22–23). Grief and pain so great
that he cannot rest: This is the experience of the person whose
soul is resting wholly on the circumstances of their work. In
this poignant picture, the author is consciously contrasting us
with the God whose labor led to real rest (Genesis 2:2), and
unconsciously with the Savior who could even sleep through a
storm(Mark 4:38).
Another reason that work feels so alienating is the injustice
and depersonalization ever-present in allsocialsystems, and
which so often infect the nature of work we do. For example, in
Ecclesiastes 5, verse 8, Qoheleth says, “If you see the poor
oppressed in a district, and justice and rights denied, do not be
surprised at such things; for one official is eyed by a higher
one, and over themboth are others higher still.” Old Testament
commentator Michael A. Eaton writes of this text that Qoheleth
“considers the frustrations of oppressive bureaucracy with its
endless delays and excuses . . . and justice is lost between the
tiers of the hierarchy.”
104 When Qoheleth wrote, only
government was a large enough institution to have a
bureaucracy, but the last two hundred years have seen the rise
of industrialization and the modern corporation. Karl Marxwas
the first person to speak of “alienated labor” in the heyday of
early-nineteenth-century European industry, where
“thousands of workers crowded into industrial centers . . .
working fourteen hours a day at physically debilitating and
mentally stultifying factory jobs . . . [a]t its best, work was a
grimformof self-denial for the sake of mere physical
survival.”
105
Of course for centuries most people endured backbreaking
work just to survive, yet at least in small farms or shops it was
possible to see the product of one’s work. But in a factory, a
worker might be tasked to put five nuts onto wheel lugs every
thirty seconds, hour after hour, day after day. In his book
Working, Studs Terkel interviewed many industrial workers,
including Mike, who put steel parts onto a rack, lowered them
into a vat of paint that bonded to their surfaces, and then
raised and unloaded the rack. That was all he did. “‘Put it on,
take it off, put it on, take it off,’ he reports. ‘In between I don’t
even try to think. . . .’ His job is typical of manufacturing work
or even office work which has been subdivided and simplified
for the sake of efficiency and higher productivity.”
106
The great shift froman industrial economy to a knowledge
and service economy has improved the immediate working
conditions of many but has locked countless others into lowpaying service sector jobs that experience the same alienating
disconnection fromthe fruits or products of their work.107 And
even in many areas such as finance, where workers make far
more than “sweatshop” wages, the size and complexity of
global corporations now makes it difficult for even highranking executives to understand what their labor is producing.
A banker in a small town making mortgage and small business
loans can easily see the purpose and fruit of her labor. A bank
worker bundling thousands of subprime loans and buying and
selling themin enormous blocks of capital will have more
difficulty answering the question, “What is your work for?”
Work can even isolate us fromone another. “There was a
man all alone; he had neither son nor brother. There was no
end to his toil, yet his eyes were not content with his wealth.
‘For whomamI toiling,’ he asked, ‘and why amI depriving
myself of enjoyment?’ This too is meaningless—a miserable
business!” (Ecclesiastes 4:7–8). This man is “alone”—without
friends or family—as a result of his work. Work can convince
you that you are working hard for your family and friends while
you are being seduced through ambition to neglect them. Work
involves “depriving”—delayed gratification and sacrifice. But
he asks, “For whom amI toiling and depriving myself of
enjoyment?” In the end, he finds that working for his own sake
is unrewarding. Commentator Derek Kidner adds: “This picture
of lonely, pointless busyness . . . checks any excessive claim
we might wish to make for the blessings of hard work.”
108
The Danger of Choice
Ecclesiastes says, “A person can do nothing better than to . . .
find satisfaction in their own toil” (2:24). One of the reasons so
many people find work to be unsatisfying is, ironically, that
people today have more power to choose their line of work
than did people in the past. Recently David Brooks wrote in
The New York Times about an online discussion conducted by
a Stanford professor with students and recent graduates about
why so many students fromthe most exclusive universities go
into either finance or consulting. Some defended their
pathways; others complained that “the smartest people should
be fighting poverty, ending disease and serving others, not
themselves.”
109 Brooks said that while the discussion was
illuminating, he was struck by the unspoken assumptions.
Many of these students seemto have a blinkered
view of their options. There’s crass but affluent
investment banking. There’s the poor but noble
nonprofit world. And then there is the world of hightech start-ups, which magically provides money and
coolness simultaneously. But there was little interest
in or awareness of the ministry, the military, the
academy, government service or the zillion other
sectors. Furthermore, few students showed any
interest in working for a company that actually makes
products. . . .
[C]ommunity service has become a patch for
morality. Many people today have not been given
vocabularies to talk about what virtue is, what
character consists of, and in which way excellence
lies, so they just talk about community service. . . . In
whatever field you go into, you will face greed,
frustration and failure. You may find your life
challenged by depression, alcoholism, infidelity, your
own stupidity and self-indulgence. . . . Furthermore . .
. [a]round what ultimate purpose should your life
revolve? Are you capable of heroic self-sacrifice or is
life just a series of achievement hoops? . . . You can
devote your life to community service and be a total
schmuck. You can spend your life on Wall Street and
be a hero. Understanding heroismand schmuckdom
requires fewer Excelspreadsheets, more Dostoyevsky
and the Book of Job.110
Brooks’s first point is that so many college students do not
choose work that actually fits their abilities, talents, and
capacities, but rather choose work that fits within their limited
imagination of how they can boost their own self-image. There
were only three high-status kinds of jobs—those that paid
well, those that directly worked on society’s needs, and those
that had the cool factor. Because there is no longer an
operative consensus on the dignity of all work, still less on the
idea that in all work we are the hands and fingers of God
serving the human community, in their minds they had an
extremely limited range of career choices. That means lots of
young adults are choosing work that doesn’t fit them, or fields
that are too highly competitive for most people to do well in.
And this sets many people up for a sense of dissatisfaction or
meaninglessness in their work.
Perhaps it is related to the mobility of our urban culture and
the resulting disruption of community, but in New York City
many young people see the process of career selection more as
the choice of an identity marker than a consideration of gifting
and passions to contribute to the world. One young man
explained, “I chose management consulting because it is filled
with sharp people—the kind of people I want to be around.”
Another said, “I realized that if I stayed in education, I’d be
embarrassed when I got to my five-year college reunion, so I’m
going to law school now.” Where one’s identity in prior
generations might come frombeing the son of so-and-so or
living in a particular part of town or being a member of a church
or club, today young people are seeking to define themselves
by the status of their work.
What wisdom, then, would the Bible give us in choosing
our work? First, if we have the luxury of options, we would
want to choose work that we can do well. It should fit our gifts
and our capacities. To take up work that we can do well is like
cultivating our selves as gardens filled with hidden potential; it
is to make the greatest roomfor the ministry of competence.
Second, because the main purpose of work is to serve the
world, we would want to choose work that benefits others. We
have to ask whether our work or organization or industry
makes people better or appeals to the worst aspects of their
characters. The answer will not always be black and white; in
fact, the answer could differ fromperson to person. In a volume
on the Christian approach to vocation, John Bernbaumand
Simon Steer presented the case of Debbie, a woman who made
a great deal of money working for an interior-decorating
company in Aspen, Colorado. The craft of interior design, like
architecture or the arts, is as positive way to promote human
well-being. But she often found herself using resources in
ways that she could not reconcile with pursuing the common
good. She left her career to work for a church and later for a
U.S. senator. Debbie said, “Not that there was anything
dishonest or illegal involved, but I was being paid on a
commission basis—thirty percent of the gross profit. One
client spent twenty thousand dollars [in the early 1980s] on
furnishings for a ten-by-twelve [foot] room. I began to
question my motivation for encouraging people to . . . spend
huge sums of money on furniture. So . . . I decided to leave.”
111
This example is not about the value of the interior design
profession or the commission formof compensation. Rather, it
illustrates the need for everyone to work out in clear personal
terms how their work serves the world.
Someone else in the same situation might have chosen to
stay, to focus on helping clients create beautiful homes, and to
see the commissions as a legitimate expression of the value of
that beauty.
Third, if possible, we do not simply wish to benefit our
family, benefit the human community, and benefit ourselves—
we also want to benefit our field of work itself. In Genesis 1 and
2, we saw that God not only cultivated his creation, but he
created more cultivators. Likewise, our goalshould not simply
be to do work, but to increase the human race’s capacity to
cultivate the created world. It is a worthy goal to want to make
a contribution to your discipline, if possible; to show a better,
deeper, fairer, more skillful, more ennobling way of doing what
you do. Dorothy Sayers explores this point in her famous
essay “Why Work?” She acknowledges that we should work
for “the common good” and “for others” (as we observed in
chapter 4), but she doesn’t want us to stop there. She says that
the worker must “serve the work.”
112
The popular catchphrase of today is that it is
everybody’s duty to serve the community, but . . .
there is, in fact, a paradoxabout working to serve the
community, and it is this: that to aimdirectly at
serving the community is to falsify the work. . . .
There are . . . very good reasons for this:
[T]he moment you [only] think of serving other
people, you begin to have a notion that other people
owe you something for your pains; you begin to
think that you have a claimon the community. You
will begin to bargain for reward, to angle for applause,
and to harbor a grievance if you are not appreciated.
But if your mind is set upon serving the work, then
you know you have nothing to look for; the only
reward the work can give you is the satisfaction of
beholding its perfection. The work takes all and gives
nothing but itself; and to serve the work is a labor of
pure love.
The only true way of serving the community is to
be truly in sympathy with the community, to be
oneself part of the community and then to serve the
work. . . . It is the work that serves the community;
the business of the worker is to serve the work.113
Sayers’s point is well taken and not often made or
understood. It is possible to imagine you are “serving the
community” because what you do is popular—at least for a
time. However, you may no longer be serving the community—
you may be using it for the way its approval makes you feel.
But if you do your work so well that by God’s grace it helps
others who can never thank you, or it helps those who come
after you to do it better, then you know you are “serving the
work,” and truly loving your neighbor.
A Handful of Quietness
In the midst of Qoheleth’s gloomregarding the pointlessness
of work, a couple of gleams shine through. “There is nothing
better for a person than to enjoy their work, because that is
their lot” (Ecclesiastes 3:22). Yes, work is our inescapable “lot,”
and so satisfaction in that realmis essential to a satisfactory
life. But how do we get that satisfaction in light of all that we
have against us? The answer: “to . . . find satisfaction in all
their toil—this is the gift of God” (Ecclesiastes 3:13). How can
we secure this gift? Qoheleth provides a hint.
Fools fold their hands and ruin themselves.
Better one handful with tranquility
than two handfuls with toil and chasing after the wind.
Ecclesiastes 4:5–6
Qoheleth commends, literally, “one handful of quietness”—
by contrast with two alternatives. One is the “two handfuls” of
wealth that come from“toil and chasing after the wind” (verse
6b). The other is the “empty handful” of wealth that comes
fromthe idleness of the fool who does not toil at all (verse 5).
Qoheleth concedes that satisfaction in work in a fallen world is
always a miraculous gift of God—and yet we have a
responsibility to pursue this gift through a particular balance.
Tranquility without toil will not bring us satisfaction; neither
will toil without tranquility. There will be both toil and
tranquility.
How we attain such a balanced life is one of the main
themes of Scripture. First, it means recognizing and renouncing
our tendency to make idols of money and power (see
Ecclesiastes 4:4—“I saw that all toil and all achievement spring
fromone person’s envy of another. This too is meaningless, a
chasing after the wind”). Second, it means putting
relationships in their proper place (see Ecclesiastes 4:8
—“There was a man all alone; he had neither son nor brother”),
even though it probably means making less money (“one
handful” rather than two).
But most of all, it will mean pursuing something that is
beyond the scope of Ecclesiastes to identify. The New
Testament reveals that the ultimate source of the tranquility we
seek is Jesus Christ, who—because he has toiled for us on the
cross—can offer us the true rest for our souls (Matthew 11:28–
30). Without the gospel of Jesus, we will have to toil not for the
joy of serving others, nor the satisfaction of a job well done,
but to make a name for ourselves.
SEVEN
Work Becomes Selfish
As people moved eastward, they found a plain in
Shinar and settled there. They said to each other,
“Come, let’s make bricks and bake them
thoroughly.” They used brick instead ofstone, and
tar for mortar. Then they said, “Come, let us build
ourselves a city, with a tower that reaches to the
heavens, so that we may make a name for ourselves;
otherwise we will be scattered over the face of the
whole earth.”
Genesis 11:2–4
Making a Name for Ourselves
One of the reasons work is both fruitless and pointless is the
powerful inclination of the human heart to make work, and its
attendant benefits, the main basis of one’s meaning and
identity. When this happens, work is no longer a way to create
and bring out the wonders of the created order, as Calvin
would say, or to be an instrument of God’s providence, serving
the basic needs of our neighbor, as Luther would say. Instead
it becomes a way to distinguish myself frommy neighbor, to
show the world and prove to myself that I’mspecial. It is a way
to accumulate power and security, and to exercise control over
my destiny. So often the observation of Qoheleth holds true —“I saw that all labor and achievement spring fromman’s
envy of his neighbor. This too is meaningless, a chasing after
the wind” (Ecclesiastes 4:4).
Nowhere is the shift fromwork as gratefulstewardship of
our gifts to neurotic fabrication of our self-worth more evident
than in the first eleven chapters of Genesis. In Genesis 1 and 2,
work is a joyful cultivation of creation for its own sake and
God’s sake (Genesis 1:28, 2:15). By Genesis 4, technology has
become a means to power. In Genesis 11, we come to the
famous story of the building of the Tower of Babel.
Two reasons are given for the building of the Tower. In
verse 3 the people of Shinar say, “‘let’s make bricks and bake
themthoroughly’ . . . instead of stone . . .” Someone had
discovered a way of making bricks that was an advance
beyond previous methods of building. It meant they could
build a much taller building than had ever been built before.
They wanted to take their new talents and discoveries to use
themin a big city. Ever since then, the people with the most
creative new ideas continue to seek out cities to find a fertile
environment for experimentation and implementation of their
dreams. So far, so good.
But there is a second, deeper reason for their project of city
building: “so that we may make a name for ourselves;
otherwise we will be scattered over the face of the whole earth”
(verse 4). What were the builders of the tower doing their work
for? What are most of today’s ambitious workers doing their
work for? Verse 4 tells us vividly—and the motivation has not
changed fromthat day to this one. It was to maximize their
power, glory, and autonomy. Yet even this boast reveals their
radical insecurity. They built the city to “make a name for
[them]selves” through their accomplishments—but if we lack a
name, it means we don’t know who we are. “To make a name”
in the language of the Bible is to construct an identity for
ourselves. We either get our name—our defining essence,
security, worth, and uniqueness—fromwhat God has done for
us and in us (Revelation 2:17), or we make a name through
what we can do for ourselves. Old Testament scholar Derek
Kidner writes, “The elements of the story are timelessly
characteristic of the spirit of the world. The project is typically
grandiose; men describe it excitedly to one another as if it were
the ultimate achievement. . . . At the same time they betray their
insecurity as they crowd together to preserve their identity and
control their fortunes.”
114
There seemto be two ways that the people of Babel are
getting their identity fromtheir work. First, the grandiose
statement “a tower that reaches to the heavens” suggests that
they are assigning spiritual value to their work that they would
be better off getting fromGod. This leads to materialism, as we
allow the fruits of our labor to tell us we are healthy and safe.
Second, the desire not to “be scattered over the face of the
whole earth” seems to mean that they also get a name from
being gathered into a large group. Part of their sense of power
and security comes fromthe size and wealth of their city. While
the first kind of identity-making comes fromcreating an idol of
one’s individual talents and accomplishments, the second
kind comes frommaking an idol of one’s group. This leads, of
course, to snobbery, imperialism, colonialism, and various
other forms of racism.
In the finalscene of this brief story, God comes down in
judgment on the city, but observe the formof his punishment.
Were it a Hollywood special effects blockbuster, he might send
lightning and earthquakes to destroy the settlement. Instead,
he “confuses their language” so that they fall into disunity and
scatter. Here we see a principle that runs throughout the Bible:
Sin has natural consequences. The desires of the sinful heart
create strains in the fabric of the real world that always lead to
breakdown. Our pride and need for personalsignificance
necessarily lead to competition, disunity, and strife. So a life of
self-glorification makes unity and love between people
impossible. It leaves us with the dreary choice between making
the self an idol (which leads to the disunity of individualistic
cultures) and making the group to an idol (which leads to the
suppression of individual freedomin tribal or collective
cultures). The two things we all want so desperately—glory
and relationship—can coexist only with God.
Babel is a pointed case study of the impossibility of
building any collective endeavor—a society, an organization, a
movement—that really “works” unless it is grounded beyond
itself, in God. Every other society will have to make an idol out
of something that will ultimately disappoint. The family, or the
individualself, or national pride, or the accruing of personal
wealth—something other than God—will end up being
considered the bottomline, the summum bonum, the giver of
the name. As Derek Kidner puts it, “The half-built city is all too
apt a monument to this aspect of man.”
115
The people of Shinar wanted to build the tallest building in
the world. This peculiar project of humankind has shown no
signs of abating for many millennia, and it seems that every
year we hear of a building going up somewhere that will make a
name for someone new and stand as the world’s tallest for a
time. This is a vivid example of the spirit of competitive pride
that drives the work in every field. Of course, there is
something very useful in this dynamic—it stimulates helpful
innovation and efficiencies—but there is also something
pernicious in it.
See how C.S. Lewis puts it in Mere Christianity:
Now what I want you to get clear is that Pride is
essentially competitive—is competitive by its very
nature. . . . Pride gets no pleasure out of having
something, only out of having more of it than the next
man. We say people are proud of being rich, or
clever, or good-looking but they are not. They are
proud of being richer, or cleverer, or better-looking
than others.116
Lewis shows us that we can either build a better mousetrap
(taller building, faster computer, cheaper airline, more luxurious
hotel) out of interest in excellence and service to human
beings, or we can do so in a race to move our organization and
ourselves into a position to look down on others. The latter
leads to ethicalshortcuts and the oppression of those who get
in our way.
I want to make it clear at this point that no one can live
entirely out of the pure impulse to serve the interests of other
people at all times. Even the most loving, morally beautiful
people fall prey to motives of self-interest, fear, and glory
seeking. Our acceptance of our own brokenness—and the
world’s—keeps us going back to God to remember what we
cannot do on our own. As a matter of fact, it is very dangerous
to think of certain people as being “the good ones” who work
to serve and of others as “the bad ones” who are seeking to
prove and serve themselves. The DNA of self-centeredness
and competitive pride are at work deep in each of us.
The Power of Being “in the Palace”
An extended case study on the themes of self-interest, power,
and vocation can be found in the Old Testament book of
Esther. The book recounts an incident when the Jews were
dispersed throughout the Persian Empire. In the first chapter
we are told how the Persian emperor, King Xerxes, has
disposed of his queen Vashti because she was too bold and
displeased him. He looks for another queen and discovers
Esther, a beautiful young Jewish girl. He sleeps with her and
she pleases him. Esther hides her Jewish identity as she is
elevated to be his queen in the royal palace.
Almost all readers of this story are offended by this early
part of the book of Esther. Feminist interpreters are outraged at
Esther’s subservience. Others are offended by the fact that
unlike Daniel, who identified himself as a Jew and lived as one
publicly in a pagan court, Esther keeps quiet. People of
traditional moral views are bothered that she sleeps with a man
to whomshe is not married. Through all these moral
compromises, she rises to a place near the center of power. So
we are posed with a question: In such morally, culturally, and
spiritually ambiguous situations, does God still work with us
and through us? The answer of the book is yes.
At the beginning of the fourth chapter of the book of
Esther—the start of act two, in a sense—we learn that Haman,
a high official, has convinced the king that the Jews are a
danger to the empire and has secured a royal decree that on a
future date, neighbors of Jewish families throughout the realm
will be free to kill themand plunder their wealth (Esther 3:1–15).
Esther’s relative Mordecai, a Jewish leader, contacts Esther
and tells her she must use her place in the palace to avert this
danger. This is a huge request. Here a believer in God, whose
place of power in the public sphere is tenuous, is being called
to use her personal and cultural capital to bring about a more
just social order. “Who knows,” Mordecaisays to her, “but
that you have come to your royal position for such a time as
this?” (Esther 4:14).
The book of Esther parallels the biblical accounts of Daniel
and Joseph. All three people were believers in the God of
Israel. Each was an official in a pluralistic, nonbelieving
government and culture. None were prophets, priests, elders,
or teachers. They had reached the highest circles of power in
their secular cultural institutions. And God used themmightily.
Dick Lucas, an English Anglican preacher, once preached a
sermon on the story of Joseph. What he said fits in well with
this account of Esther. He said that if you were to go to a book
table at a church and see a biography with the title The Man
God Uses or The Woman God Uses, you would immediately
think it was the story of a missionary, teacher, church leader, or
specialist in some sort of spiritual work. He points out that
what you have in the story of Joseph is a highly successful
secular official. Lucas says, “In the long termI think being a
preacher, missionary, or leading a Bible study group in many
ways is easier. There is a certain spiritual glamour in doing it,
and what we should be doing each day is easier to discern
more black and white, not so gray. It is often hard to get
Christians to see that God is willing not just to use men and
women in ministry, but in law, in medicine, in business, in the
arts. This is the great shortfall today.”
117
We have a perfect example in this story. Since Jerusalem
was destroyed by Nebuchadnezzar, the Jews have been in
exile. At this point in biblical history, they are on their way
back. They are trying to rebuild their lives, their city, and their
nation. Ray Bakke, an academic and writer, points out that God
shows the diversity of the people he uses by giving us three
different books in the Bible describing how he restores the
nation of Israel back to its homeland.118 First, the book of Ezra
is about a minister, a teacher of the word. The Jews needed to
be reacquainted with the Bible so their lives could be shaped
by what God said. Second, the book of Nehemiah is about an
urban planner and developer who used his management skills
to rebuild the wall of Jerusalemand reinstate stability so that
economic and civic life could begin to flourish again. Last, the
book of Esther is about a woman with power in the civil
government working against racial injustice. Here you have
male and female, lay and clergy. You have people working for
spiritual maturity, economic flourishing, and better public
policy, in cultures that defined and valued these ideas
differently fromthe Jews. And God is using themall.
Don’t be too quick to miss the connection between Esther
and us. I remember some years ago hearing a Hispanic pastor
preaching on the book of Esther. Many of his older church
members had been immigrants and had little money or clout,
but many of the younger generation had gone to college and
had become professionals. The preacher told themthat even
though they didn’t see it, they were “in the palace.” They had
more financial and cultural capital than they realized. And, he
said in no uncertain terms, many of themwere using that
capital to feather their own nests and move ahead in their own
careers rather than leveraging it for others. He reminded them
that there were poorer people across the city who needed their
connections and talents. He said that inside their circles of
influence and fields of work there was corruption that needed
their attention. He admitted that if his listeners conducted
themselves in that way, they might make less money or move
up the ladder slower or run into conflict that could hurt their
careers. But that doesn’t matter, he said. Don’t just get into the
palace and bend every rule you can to stay there. Serve. You
have come to your royal position for such a time as this.
I know some of us feel like Esther. There is the VP of an
investment bank who has kept many of his investors in the
dark—maybe only passively. There is the football coach who
violates a number of NCAA recruiting rules. There is the
municipal official who doesn’t take bribes but looks the other
way when she sees colleagues who do. In part because of
these compromises, they have all risen and now occupy high
positions; but their consciences are not clear. You may be like
them, on a smaller or larger scale. You may have made some
choices that were unethical or very much in the “gray area.”
You may have been asked to repeatedly tell clients that the
work was done in a certain way when you knew it wasn’t. You
may not have spoken out when you knew you should have.
You have some clout now, but you don’t feel as though your
conscience is clear. Do you think Esther’s conscience was
clear? Is anyone’s ever completely clear? It is never too late.
God urges you to think about where you are and why you are
there, to realize the importance of being in the palace. It’s
possible that only then can He use you to do His work in this
world.
I have a friend who worked in private equity at a major
financialservices firm. We asked himto teach a class on
character and integrity in our church. During the class he
shared a recent dilemma in which the teamwho worked for him
identified an excellent investment opportunity that would
provide a good return for his teamand the company. The only
problemwas that the business in my friend’s mind, not only
didn’t make a positive contribution to society but damaged it.
It wasn’t illegal, and the firmitself had no issue with investing
in this business. He was torn between his obligation to create
the highest value for his own company and staff, and his faithbased commitment to human flourishing. He could veto the
investment, but that would only put the deal in the hands of a
competing bank. He could agree to the investment and profit
fromsomething that he didn’t believe in. He wanted to at least
take a stand and live out his convictions in some way. So he
announced to his teamthat he would not veto the deal, but he
would personally choose to not participate in any bonus that
might result fromtheir investment. That gave himthe
opportunity to explain his rationale and present a picture of
God’s intentions for human flourishing. The deal closed, and
the investment made the bank a lot of money. But what of my
friend’s sacrifice? He took an opportunity, at a true cost to
himself, to take a stand and point to his colleagues an alternate
vision of life in the palace.
The Peril of Being “in the Palace”
Esther’s concern was very real; Mordecai was asking her to
take an enormous risk. In that time and place, to fall out of
favor with the king did not mean losing your job; it more often
meant losing your life. Esther replies to Mordecai that it was a
capital offense for anyone to go in to the king unbidden, “. . .
unless the king extends the gold scepter to themand spares
their lives. But thirty days have passed since I was called to go
to the king” (Esther 4:11). Surely Esther is remembering that the
last queen was deposed because she was too bold! Mordecai
doesn’t know what he is asking of her; she could lose
everything.
Mordecai responds that indeed he does know. He steps up
to the high point of the story rhetorically, narratively, and
theologically: “Do not think that because you are in the king’s
house you alone of all the Jews will escape. For if you remain
silent at this time, relief and deliverance for the Jews will arise
fromanother place, but you and your father’s family will
perish” (Esther 4:13–14). Mordecai is saying that if Esther risks
losing the palace, she might lose everything, but if she doesn’t
risk losing the palace, she will lose everything. It is an
agonizing argument. If all the Jews are killed, Esther will be
sniffed out and killed. If the Jews are not killed, Esther will be
considered a traitor. Mordecai then closes with hope: “And
who knows but that you have come to your royal position for
such a time as this?” (verse 14). What Mordecaisays has
direct application for most of us.
Mordecai, in effect, appeals to the idea of vocation. He
says the same thing the Hispanic pastor said: Unless you use
your clout, your credentials, and your money in service to the
people outside the palace, the palace is a prison; it has already
given you your name. You may think you have been given little
because you are always striving for more, but you have been
given much, and God has called you to put it into play. It is
natural to root your identity in your position in the palace; to
rest your security in the fact that you have a certain measure of
control over the variables in your life; to find your significance
in having clout in certain circles. But if you are unwilling to risk
your place in the palace for your neighbors, the palace owns
you.
How do you get a new name, based on something other
than the palace? The text hints at the answer: grace. Mordecai
says to Esther, “Who knows but that you have come to your
royal position for such a time as this?” The Hebrew word
translated as “come” is a passive verb. It would be better
translated: “Who knows but that you were not brought to your
royal position because of this?” He is reminding Esther that
she did not get to the palace except by grace. She did not
develop or earn her beauty, nor did she produce this
opportunity; they were given to her. Have you contemplated
how much this is true of you too? If someone claims that your
professionalstatus is a result of grace, you immediately think
they don’t know how hard you worked to get into your school,
how hard you worked in school and at your internships, how
you have performed better than your peers at work, and so on.
However, you worked with talents you did not earn; they were
given to you. You went through doors of opportunity you did
not produce; they just opened for you. Therefore, everything
you have is a matter of grace, and so you have the freedomto
serve the world through your influence, just as you can
through your competence.
Living with Greatness in the Palace
Esther begins to respond. The Esther we know fromchapters 1
and 2—the demure beauty queen who lies about her race to
stay on the inside track—begins to fade away. The Esther who
never rocks the boat and never ruffles any feathers starts to
give orders. She sends a message to Mordecai: “Go, gather
together all the Jews who are in Susa, and fast for me. Do not
eat or drink for three days, night or day. I and my attendants
will fast as you do. When this is done, I will go to the king,
even though it is against the law. And if I perish, I perish”
(Esther 4:16).
What happens next is one of the most absorbing narrative
accounts in the Bible. By a series of “coincidences”—of
course, they are anything but—as well as Esther’s own
courage, she is received by the king and is able to unmask the
hatred and calculation of Haman so that Haman is executed and
the Jewish people saved.
But it would be a mistake to end the account here. There is
a danger that you might merely be inspired by Esther’s
example. You look at Esther and decide you are not going to
look at your position and your intellectual, social, and financial
capital in a new way. Instead of looking at your influence as a
means to move yourself ahead, you are going to use it to serve
people; you are going to take more risk to see that justice is
done. Or you may decide that you have been too quiet about
your beliefs, so you resolve to speak up and let people know
what you believe. Those are good and right impulses; by all
means follow them.
Yet they aren’t enough. To begin with, your resolve won’t
last. If you are merely inspired by an example—you want to be
like Esther, or you want to be more like the people the Hispanic
pastor said we needed—then your basic motivation is
probably guilt. It could be guilt over selfishness, guilt over
elitism, even guilt over ungratefulness. And those may be the
right place to start! But if guilt is the extent of your motivation,
you can be sure it will wear off before long because living in a
new way will be hard.
Or, you might get inspired, but overreact. So often I have
seen people who have previously kept secret about their faith
and who overcompensate and become obnoxious. They decide
to be an outspoken, principled person; they will not be like
“those closeted Christians.” Yet they haven’t really left the
palace because they are still getting their identity fromtheir
performance of a “better” kind of Christianity. They have not
really changed; they are very self-righteously being more
overt.
Let me suggest how you are more likely to live with
integrity, even greatness, in the palace. Look at Esther not
merely as an example but as a signpost, a pointer. You see, God
created us, he gave us everything we have, and he sustains
our life every moment; therefore, we owe himeverything. But
we do not live that way. We live as if everything we have is
ours, to use as we see fit, to make our own name. Even people
who do not consider themselves Christians know, on
reflection, that something is wrong with this picture. By
everyone’s standards, we are violating our relationship with
God. The religions of the world disagree on the story and the
reasons, but they all agree on something: There is a gap—or a
chasm—between the divine and us. Some religions say we
must cross that divide through sacrifice, rituals, transformation
of consciousness, or ethical practice. But somehow we need
something to bridge that gap between God and ourselves. How
will we find it?
Here’s the answer of the Bible, right fromthis story. Esther
saved her people through identification and mediation. Her
people were condemned, but she identified with themand came
under that condemnation. She risked her life and said, “If I
perish, I perish.” Because she identified, she could mediate
before the throne of power as no one else could, and because
she received favor there, that favor was transferred to her
people. Saving people through identification and mediation—
does that remind you of anyone? Jesus Christ, the Son of God,
lived in the ultimate palace with ultimate beauty and glory, and
he voluntarily left thembehind. Philippians 2 says that he had
equality with the Father, but he did not hold on to it; instead,
he emptied himself, identified with us, and took on our
condemnation. He did not do it at the risk of his life but at the
cost of his life. He didn’t say, “If I perish, I perish,” but “When I
perish, I’ll perish.” He went to the Cross and died; he made
atonement for our sins. Now he stands before the throne of the
universe, and the favor he has procured is ours if we believe in
him. His is ultimate mediation.
If you see Esther not as an example but as a pointer to
Jesus, and if you see Jesus not as an example but as a Savior
doing these things for you personally, then you willsee how
valuable you are to him. Meditate on these things, and the
truth will change your identity. It will convince you of your
real, inestimable value. And ironically, when you see how much
you are loved, your work will become far less selfish. Suddenly
all the other things in your work life—your influence, your
résumé, and the benefits they bring you—become just things.
You can risk them, spend them, and even lose them. You are
free. Esther was able to do what she did merely on the basis of
a vague revelation that God is a god of grace. But now we
know so much more! She didn’t know God was actually going
to come to earth himself and do what she was doing on an
infinitely greater scale, at an infinitely greater cost, with
infinitely greater benefits to humanity. We now know so much
more about his grace, our value to him, and our future.
If you see what Jesus Christ has done for you, losing the
ultimate palace for you, then you will be able to start to serve
God and your neighbor fromyour place in the palace. Karen
Jobes, who wrote a commentary on the book of Esther, says
Esther is called Queen Esther fourteen times; thirteen of those
happen after she says, “If I perish, I perish.”
119 She becomes a
person of greatness not by trying to make a name for herself;
and you will become a person of greatness not by trying to
make yourself into one, but by serving the One who said to his
Father, “For your sake, thy will be done.”
EIGHT
Work Reveals Our Idols
Do not make any idols.
Exodus 34:17
The Pervasiveness and Power of Idols
David closeted himself in his corner office while his new board
of directors considered his demands. “I’ll make themcome to
me,” he thought, leaning on the negotiating techniques he had
learned over the course of a very successful career. In two
decades David had risen to become CEO of a series of
increasingly high-profile technology companies, and the
previous week had been one of those great moments of payoff.
Flying high at dinner after the analyst call announcing the sale
of his latest company to a nationally known enterprise, he said
to his associate, “This is it! It doesn’t get any better than this!
This is what it’s all about!”
But now it was time to exit and move on to the next
opportunity. While the payout fromthis deal was respectable —a valuation of three times annual earnings and a nice round
million dollars in his pocket—it was really only a stepping-
stone to a bigger venture. He’d done what he was brought in
to do—sell the company before the technology was displaced
by another one and give the investors a good return on their
dollar.
His thoughts floated to the million dollars. His wife wanted
a beach house, he wanted a lake house; their exquisite home
had just been renovated, and the kids were doing well. They’d
also been able to buy homes for each of their parents, nearby
and in good neighborhoods. David felt good about the way
he’d been able to support his family. This was important to
him.
Years ago, as his father struggled with work, and money for
the family was extremely tight, he’d vowed to himself that his
life would be different. He’d use the opportunities his parents
had given him, modest as they might be, to make something of
himself. It would be a way to honor his father, now passed
away. And his children would never have to want for anything.
Yet his momwas already saying, “So, David, you have enough
already. Do you really have to find the next bigger and better
company? What’s behind all this drive?”
At that point, the door opened, and the board member he’d
worked with most closely on the deal walked in. Sitting down,
he said, “David, we really need you to honor your contract and
stay the full year; the company needs you to lead it right now.
You were one of the key reasons we thought buying the
company was a good deal—you’re smart, you’re a good leader,
you can negotiate partnerships and deals to keep this company
out front. We can’t agree to letting you out now.”
David loathed the prospect of staying on for another year
and was determined to get the full payout in spite of the terms
of the contract. He held the ultimate card: They certainly
wouldn’t want to keep himif he made it clear that he didn’t
want to stay. No one can lead well if his heart isn’t in it, right?
A week later, having refused to budge on any point, he
walked away with the payout and very quickly moved into the
corner office of a Fortune 500 company.
When contemporary people hear the word “idols” they are
most likely to think of the entertainment world, where
celebrities are called “teen idols” or where aspirants compete to
be the next “American Idol.” Or perhaps the word conjures
thoughts of primitive people bowing down to figurines and
images. If the word is ever connected to the world of work, it is
usually a rhetorical device to say someone has become a
workaholic or is rapaciously greedy, so that success or money
has become an object of extreme devotion. These are all
legitimate uses of the term, but they are only the most extreme
cases of the powerful and pervasive conception that is at the
heart of biblical faith. The most famous and influential moral
code in the world, the Ten Commandments, begins with God’s
great directive on idolatry: “You shall have no other gods
before me” (Exodus 20:3).
What does it mean to have other gods? The commandment
says: “You shall not make for yourself an image in the formof
anything in heaven above or on the earth beneath or in the
waters below. You shall not bow down to themor worship
them. . . .” (Exodus 20:4–5). We have an alternate or counterfeit
god if we take anything in creation and begin to “bow down”
to it—that is, to love, serve, and derive meaning fromit more
than fromthe true God. Because we can set up idols in our
hearts (Ezekiel 14:3–7), we recognize that “making an image” of
something is not necessarily a physical process but is certainly
a spiritual and psychological one. It means imagining and
trusting anything to deliver the control, security, significance,
satisfaction, and beauty that only the real God can give. It
means turning a good thing into an ultimate thing.
Many have recognized the significance of the Bible’s
command against idolatry, placed at the very beginning of
God’s directions for life. No one grasped its power more than
Martin Luther. He defined idolatry as looking to some created
thing to give you what only God can give you. Therefore, he
argued, even nonreligious people serve “gods”—ideologies or
abilities that they believe can justify their lives. French
philosopher Luc Ferry, himself a nonbeliever in God, likewise
argues that everyone seeks “some way to face life with
confidence, and death without fear and regret.” All of us look
to something to assure ourselves we have spent our lives well.
David, in our opening example, may have sought financial
security money and success as his “salvation” fromthe
struggle of his childhood, although he would never have used
that term. Whatever it is we seek, Ferry says, it is a formof
salvation.120 This fits with the implication of the first of the Ten
Commandments. God says, “I amthe Lord your God; you shall
have no other gods before me.” Notice that God says that
either he will be our God or something else will. He leaves open
no in-between possibility of having no gods at all that we rely
on to “save” us.
Luther saw how harmoniously the concept of idolatry tied
the Old and New Testaments together. The Old Testament
talks about idolatry a great deal, while the New Testament,
especially the letters of Paul, speaks about union with Christ
and justification by faith—means through which we are saved
by God’s grace rather than by our own efforts. Luther came to
realize that these two ideas—to set up an idol and to try to
save yourself through your own efforts—are describing
essentially the same thing. In his Treatise Concerning Good
Works, Luther wrote:
The First Commandment commands: “Thou shalt
have no other gods,” which means: “Since I alone am
God, thou shalt place all thy confidence trust and
faith on Me alone, and on no one else.” . . . All those
who do not at all times trust God and . . . His favor,
grace and goodwill, but seek His favor in other things
or in themselves, do not keep this Commandment,
and practice real idolatry. . . . If we do not believe that
God is gracious to us and is pleased with us, or if we
presumptuously expect to please Himonly through
and after our works, then it is all pure deception,
outwardly honoring God, but inwardly setting up self
as a false god. . . .121
Here Luther argues that when we fail to believe that God
accepts us fully in Christ, and look to some other way to justify
or prove ourselves, we commit idolatry. Secular people may
look for “favor, grace, and goodwill” in the acquisition of
power, or the experience of pleasure, while religious people
may trust in their moral virtue or acts of devotion or ministry.
But all are fundamentally the same inner transaction. In each
case the heart is given to a counterfeit god.
When Paul walked around Athens, he saw that the “city
was full of idols” (Acts 17:16). He was speaking of actual
physical objects, but once we grasp the biblical definition of
idolatry, we realize that every city and indeed every human
heart is filled with idols. They are literally everywhere.
Idols are not only pervasive, they are powerful. Why do the
Ten Commandments begin with a prohibition of idolatry? It is,
Luther argued, because we never break the other
commandments without breaking the first. For example,
suppose you know that complete transparency in a business
negotiation will yield you considerably less leverage than will a
small measure of deceit. In that situation, if you lie or obscure
inconvenient facts, it is because you have counted success as
more important than obedience to God or the good of your
“neighbor” with whomyou are negotiating. So beneath the sin
of lying is the deeper, conditioning sin of idolatry. It could be
argued that everything we do wrong—every cruel action,
dishonest word, broken promise, self-centered attitude—stems
froma conviction deep in our souls that there is something
more crucial to our happiness and meaning than the love of
God.
Idolatry has power over our actions because it has power
over our hearts. Twenty-two-year-old Andrew is out of work
and broke because he’s terrified that if he takes a job loading
boxes in a warehouse he will be stunted for life—earning
minimumwage, doing work that only people beneath himdo,
losing his status among his friends as a cool guy, and perhaps
even losing his girlfriend. He had wanted to play baseball, and
he nurses that hope, thinking if he could get back into college
by playing baseball, then his life would be set. When we set
our hope on an idol in this way, we are saying to ourselves, “If
I had that, it would fixeverything; then I’d feel my life really
had value.” Now, if anything is our “salvation” we must have
it, and so we treat it as nonnegotiable. If circumstances
threaten to take it away, we are paralyzed with uncontrollable
fear; if something or someone has taken it away, we burn with
anger and struggle with a sense of despair.
Cultural and Corporate Idols
Thus far we have been speaking of individual idols that distort
our personal lives. We know that people develop “fatal
attractions” for status and power, for approval and
achievement, for romance and sexual pleasure, or for affluence
and comfort. Personal idols profoundly drive and shape our
behavior, including our work. Idols of comfort and pleasure can
make it impossible for a person to work as hard as is necessary
to have a faithful and fruitful career. Idols of power and
approval, on the other hand, can lead us to overwork or to be
ruthless and unbalanced in our work practices. Idols of control
take several forms—including intense worry, lack of trust, and
micromanagement. While we are usually blind to our own idols,
it is not very hard to see themin others, and to see how others’
counterfeit gods fill themwith anxiety, anger, and
discouragement. So the concept of individual idols is not too
hard for us to grasp.
However, idols are not only the basis for personalsins and
problems; they are also the basis for collective ones. When an
individual makes and serves an idol, it creates psychological
distortion and trouble; when a family, group, or country makes
and serves an idol, it creates social and cultural trouble.122 To
understand this concept of cultural or “corporate” idols (in the
sense of a group of people, not in the sense of a business
structure), we must begin with a more precise description of
culture than we used in Chapter 3. Columbia University
professor Andrew Delbanco writes:
I will use the word culture to mean the stories and
symbols by which we try to hold back the melancholy
suspicion that we live in a world without meaning. . . .
Any history of hope in America must, therefore, make
roomat its center for this dogged companion of hope —the lurking suspicion that all our getting and
spending amounts to nothing more than fidgeting
while we wait for death.
All cultures have this need for contact with what
WilliamJames called the “Ideal Power” through
which that “feeling of being in a wider life than that of
this world’s little interests” may be reached. . . .123
Every culture has a set of answers to the questions
addressed in the book of Ecclesiastes—questions such as
“What are we here to accomplish in our life? What are we
getting, spending, and living for?” Without some answers to
these big questions, it is impossible to live and make decisions,
and every culture is at some level based on a set of shared
beliefs about how to answer these questions. So while each
individual needs to live for something, so does each society.
Or, put another way, every society puts before its members
some ideas or values that it says will give life meaning.
Friedrich Nietzsche concurred that every society offers up
“ideals” to its members.124 Ancient cultures called people to
live for God (or the gods), for family and tribe or nation.
Modern societies turned away fromthe authorities of religion
and tradition, and replaced themwith the authorities of reason
and individual freedom. Nietzsche was looking mainly at
modern cultures, but he observed that all cultures—even selfstyled “secular” ones—promote moral absolutes and
transcendent values to which (they said) all people must
conformif they are to have worth or meaning. These cultural
ideals are truly idols in the biblicalsense; they are not
commended as simply good ideas. Rather, they are treated as
holy and unassailable, and promoted with religious fervor and
passion. They are said to bestow happiness and fulfillment
(earthly forms of salvation). All people are obliged to serve
these ideals, and those who despise themare themselves to be
rejected. So while ancient cultures ostracized anyone who
disbelieved in the gods, modern culture castigates anyone who
is thought guilty of bigotry or appears to be an enemy of
equality and individual freedom.125
If every culture has its idols, how do they influence how we
do our work? Keeping in mind that an idol is a good thing
turned into an ultimate thing, then a corporate idol is an
overemphasis and absolutizing of an admirable cultural trait.
We should expect, then, that each culture’s emphases have
some beneficial influences on work and yet at the same time
harmfully distort it. Christians seeking to work faithfully and
well must discern the shape of the idols functioning in their
professions and industries so as to both affirmthe beneficial
aspects and offset the excesses and distortions.
So what kinds of corporate and cultural idols are there?
Keeping in mind the inevitability of overgeneralization in such
a brief treatment, I will provide an overview of the prevailing
idols of the three dominant cultures of Western history:
traditional, modern, and postmodern. In nearly every field of
work, you will encounter a mixture of these sets of cultural
idols, because they will have influenced the founders, heroes,
leaders, and innovators of the dominant institutions in diverse
ways over the course of generations.
Idols of Traditional Cultures
As we just mentioned, traditional cultures in the past and
present understand the world to contain moral absolutes that
are known mainly through tradition and religion. Wisdomis
passed down fromone generation to the next through figures
of authority such as parents, priests, and rulers. Such cultures
teach their members that their lives have meaning if they
assume and are faithful to their duties and roles within the
community—as sons and daughters, as fathers and mothers,
and as members of their tribe and nation. In such cultures,
family, race, and nation can become dangerously paramount.
This is the basis for honor killings in such cultures, where
some members of a family kill a member perceived to bring
dishonor on the clan. This elevation of family in traditional
cultures often results in minimalsupport and recourse to the
victims of spousal and child abuse. This also helps us
understand why Japanese soldiers in World War II despised
Allied prisoners of war who, they reasoned, had put their own
individual lives ahead of the nation by not fighting to the
death. All of these practices seemalmost impossible to
understand for those of us in contemporary Western societies.
Nonetheless, in Western societies we have stillstruggled
mightily with the idols of race and racism. American theologian
Reinhold Niebuhr understood that the tendency to privilege
the interests of one’s own tribe or nation over others is due to
the “cosmic insecurity” of our sinful hearts.126 This insecurity
fixes on race to bolster our sense of value. We see differences
between our own culture and those of others in highly
moralistic terms; we look down on other races so we can think
of ourselves as superior. This idol can easily grow into
something very cruel. As a result, it is possible to make
nationalsecurity or cultural and racial purity into an end in
itself, justifying militarismand domestic oppression or at least
indifference to the plight of minorities.
The idolatries of more traditional places and cultures also
affect our work. The idol of race can mean that many
businesses are closed to people and ideas fromculturally and
racially different backgrounds—to the overall detriment of the
company’s competitiveness and the community’s health. The
idol of nationalism, of course, has led industrialists to support
militaristic programs that may have seemed patriotic at the time,
but in hindsight ruined their reputation for all time.
Traditional cultures make idols out of socialstability and
the good of the whole over the rights of the individual. This
has a major impact on business practices. In Japan, still largely
a traditional culture, it has not been acceptable either for
workers to move fromcompany to company in order to find a
better salary, or for companies to lay workers off to sustain
profits. Until the turn of this century, the Japanese ideal had
been lifelong employment—employees were expected to stay
with the same company their entire lives. In a traditional
culture, the profit motive of business is accompanied by a
strong social obligation to provide jobs for people. Employees
are less concerned with their own pay than with the status and
reputation of the company where they are employed.
There are certainly some benefits to this emphasis on
loyalty and socialstability. However, it can also lead to
exploitation of workers, who are often stigmatized if they make
(what Western cultures would see as) just demands for
increased salary and benefits. It also can lead to economic
devastation during economic downturns. A New York Times
article during the 1992 recession, “No Layoff Ideal Costs Japan
Dearly,” explained how during downturns U.S. companies are
able to more quickly recover financial health—and therefore
provide jobs for more people in the long run—by reducing
staff. The Japanese ideal led to many companies completely
collapsing and doing even more damage to people’s lives
because their culture did not feel free to make the hard call of
layoffs.127
Idols of Modern Cultures
Great changes occurred in Western societies approximately
five hundred years ago. With the rise of modern science and
the philosophical movement called the Enlightenment, modern
society dethroned the idols of religion, tribe, and tradition—
replacing themwith reason, empiricism, and individual freedom
as the ultimate values that overrule all others.
The modern value of “reason” includes several elements.
One is the ideal of progress, embodied in the unstoppable
forward march of science and technology. Modern societies
adopted “the conviction that the diffusion of science and
technology would bring happier days and that history and
politics must be shaped by [this] ideal.”
128
It was said that
science alone has a rigorous, empirical method that results in
proof, not merely speculation or feeling. Also in the modern
worldview, absolutely everything has a natural and therefore
physical cause. At the popular level this view still has
enormous cultural authority. Most people do not venture to
make a case in the public square without relying on “scientific
evidence,” which is seen as objective and unassailable. The
implicit idea is that science, given enough time, will be able to
answer all questions and solve all problems.129 Scientific
methods have extended beyond the physical and social
sciences into the realms of marketing, politics, entertainment.
Modern culture stopped looking to the wisdomof the ancients
or to any revelation fromreligious authorities except for
optional, private “spiritual” comfort. To build a flourishing
society, we need only human reason informed by the scientific
method.
Closely related to this radical new hope in human reason
was the absolutizing of individual freedom. Modern societies
no longer saw the world as containing binding moral norms of
truth to which all people must submit. Rather, they insisted that
there was no standard higher than the right of the individual to
choose the life he or she wanted to live. The only moral wrong,
in this view, was to keep other individuals fromchoosing to
live as they found fulfilling. That meant that, ultimately, there
was no moral authority or cause higher than the happiness of
the self.130 As many have pointed out, this made “choice” and
feelings into something sacred and holy. In the modern world,
“now, the individual was the center of the universe, and the
creature beyond all else entitled to absolute respect.”
131
In
other words, the human self had replaced God.
The idols of modern culture have had a profound influence
on the shape of our work today. In traditionalsocieties people
found their meaning and sense of value by submitting their
interests and sacrificing their desires to serve higher causes
like God, family, and other people. In modern societies there is
often no higher cause than individual interests and desires.
This shift powerfully changed the role of work in people’s lives —it now became the way we defined ourselves. Traditional
cultures tended to see people’s place on the social ladder as
assigned by nature or convention, each family having its
“proper place.” That view had put too little stock in the role of
individual talent, ambition, and hard work for determining the
outcome of one’s life. But modern society responded by
putting too much stock in the autonomous person. Philosopher
Luc Ferry explains how the new individualismof modern
society influenced our work:
In the aristocratic [traditional] worldview, work was
considered a defect, a servile activity—literally,
reserved for slaves. In the modern worldview, it
becomes an arena for self-realization, a means not
only of educating oneself but also of fulfillment. . . .
Work becomes the defining activity of man. . . . His
aimis to create himself by remaking the world. . . .132
So the modern idol of individualismhas tended to raise
work frombeing a good thing to being nearly a formof
salvation. At the same time, the modern idols of reason and
empiricismintensified the work experience by creating a
pressure for higher production than had ever been applied
before. Near the end of the nineteenth century, Frederick
Taylor developed “Scientific Management,” which was called
the “rationalization” of production.133
It was the intense
application of scientific methods to business processes to
generate maximumefficiency.
At the time, laborers in the factories taken over by Taylor’s
methods reacted with fury. They felt dehumanized—since all
personal discretion and initiative was taken out of their hands —and driven like slaves. Taylor’s systemvalued every task
being simplified, standardized, and executed with absolute
uniformity every time. As many have pointed out, this is how
machines work. Peter Drucker, the foremost critic of Taylor’s
approach argued that the extreme rationalization of work did
indeed treat human beings like cogs in a mechanism.
“Machines,” he wrote, “work best if they do only one task, if
they do it repetitively, and if they do the simplest possible task.
. . . [But] the human being . . . is a very poorly designed
machine tool. The human being excels . . . in coordination. He
excels in relating perception to action. He works best if the
entire human being, muscles, senses, and mind is engaged in
the work.”
134
Is the influence of modern idols positive for our work
today? The answer is somewhat yes but ultimately no. Modern
idols bestowed greater dignity on some kinds of work than had
existed in ancient cultures, and in this sense it came closer to
the high regard the Bible has for labor, but it overshot the mark
in many ways. We are far more efficient and productive than
we used to be, but this progress has come at a great cost. My
own grandfather’s experience was a good case study of the
mixture of good and evil brought to the realmof work in the
modern age. Born in Italy in 1880 into a traditional culture and a
family of potters, he told his father that he didn’t want to follow
in his career footsteps. He was told that it would be impossible
in that stratified society to get another job or even move to
another village. In response he emigrated to America in 1897, a
far more modern society allowing a social mobility unthinkable
in his homeland. There he began to work on the subways
under New York City under grueling conditions that demanded
high productivity but provided no safety, a situation that
would not have happened to himin his own village. After
almost losing a leg in a work accident he moved to Wilmington,
Delaware, where through his ability to start his own butcher
shop—which also would have been unlikely in his own village —he established himself in his new country. Within his lifetime
he was liberated, dashed, and rehabilitated by the effects of
modern culture.
Idols of Postmodern Cultures
Beginning with the writings of the philosopher Friedrich
Nietzsche in the latter half of the nineteenth century, a new
culturalshift began to occur in Western societies.135 Long
before the horrors of the world wars, Nietzsche declared that
the idea that science will lead to inevitable human progress was
an idol—a new quasi-religious faith—and that it had no
grounding in reality. Science can tell us only what is, never
how things ought to be. Human beings are capable of kindness
and unselfishness but also of cruelty and violence, and science
willsimply serve the interests of whoever is in power. There is
no particular reason, he pointed out, to think science will
somehow lead us to a better world. It could just as easily lead
us into a bleak future through armed conflict, or an ecological
disaster, or the rise of tyrants who use technology for powerful
social control.
Nietzsche struck a blow not only to the modern idol of
reason and science, but also to the new modern morality of
individual rights and freedom. With great force, he pointed out
the deep inconsistency of the modern view. Modern culture
tells us there are no moral absolutes and everyone must
choose his or her own standard for right and wrong, yet it then
turns and says we must respect human rights and honor the
freedomand dignity of every human being. “But on what
basis?” Nietzsche would ask. If there are no moral absolutes,
then how can you arbitrarily declare that there are? If human
beings are simply the product of the same natural processes
that formed rust and rocks, why does every person deserve to
be treated with equality and dignity?
Though Nietzsche’s arguments were deeply disturbing, his
basic points were very telling, and in so many ways the
disasters and atrocities of the twentieth century only seemed
to bear themout. As a result, despite the fact that in Western
society there is still a strong latent influence fromtraditional
worldviews such as Christianity, along with much of the older
modern optimismabout science, progress, and human freedom,
there has been a pervasive shift called the “postmodern turn.”
It is more a mood than a coherent set of beliefs. There is far
more cynicismabout all truth claims and plans for society—
both older traditional ones and more modern, liberal ones.
Movies and novels about the future in the mid-twentieth
century often depicted a human society filled with unceasing
progress in health, education, scientific knowledge, and social
harmony. Today nearly all movies and novels are far more
pessimistic and narrate allsorts of dystopian outcomes.
Despite Nietzsche’s programto rid the culture of idols,
many have pointed out that ultimately postmodern thought
makes an idol out of reality as it is. Writers such as Edward
Docx, in his article “PostmodernismIs Dead,” lays out this
criticismwell. He points out that if all moral claims are really
just power plays and the product of one’s social and cultural
location, as postmodern theorists argue, then it becomes
impossible to critique any condition in a society. No one has
any ability to mount a programof reformor denounce injustice.
Postmodernismenshrines the present reality, then, as an
absolute.136
The most prominent critic of Nietzsche and the results of
postmodernismwas the German philosopher Martin Heidegger.
He identified the idol of our culture today when he called us
“the world of technology.” Luc Ferry explains Heidegger’s
point:
Before all else, technique concerns means and not
ends. . . . Instead of being inspired by transcendental
ideas . . . the modern economy functions like
Darwinian naturalselection. . . . No one [today] can
be reasonably convinced that this teeming and
disruptive evolutionary impulse . . . leads infallibly to
what is better. . . . For the first time in the history of
life, a living species holds the means to destroy the
entire planet, and this species does not know where it
is going.137
Heidegger, Docx, and others such as Jacques Ellul138 are
saying that technology, uncertainty, and the market have
become the idols of a postmodern society. Because in
postmodern society no one is sure or can agree about “ends”
or goals for the human race, we now have only “means” or
techniques. Since there is no longer any dominant vision of
healthy human life or good human society, we are left with
nothing but individual competition for personalsuccess and
power. If something can be done through technology, it will
be done, because our technology has no higher ideals or moral
values to guide it or limit it.
The resulting fragmentation of society caused by the
postmodern turn is itself a pervasive topic of debate in the
academy. Both Robert Bellah and Andrew Delbanco argue the
case that any cohesive society needs to give individuals
something bigger and greater than themselves to live for.
Delbanco argues that, ironically, the heyday of the new Left in
the 1960s and of the new Right in the 1980s “cooperated in
installing instant gratification as the hallmark of the good life. . .
. What was lost . . . was any conception of a common destiny
worth tears, sacrifice, and maybe even death.”
139
Delbanco agrees with others who say that in the end,
postmodern idols cause individuals to become dupes of
advertisers—falling into “unconscious conformity with other
interchangeable products of the marketplace.”
140 Many writers
argue convincingly that the values of the market—
consumerismand cost-benefit efficiencies—are now spreading
into every part of life, even family life. This is because modern
capitalismis no longer simply a useful instrument for the
distribution of goods and services, but has become a nearabsolute idol.141 And even in the most successful capitalist
societies like that of the United States, many recognize the
cultural contradiction that consumerismtends to undermine the
very virtues of self-control and responsibility on which
capitalismis founded.142
How does this shifting of mood and meaning affect our
work now? I spoke to a man, now in his eighties, who was one
of the pioneers of the hedge fund industry. He told me that in
the late 1950s and most of the 1960s, the great majority of the
best and the brightest did not want to go into financialservices —they wanted to go into education and science. They wanted
to teach the young, put people on the moon, and solve world
hunger. And the leading voices of the day told themthey
could do it. At some point by the late 1980s he sensed a
change in society. There was far less optimismabout social
progress or even how to define it. People were divided by the
culture wars. Cynicismset in, and over time the most ambitious
and talented people wanted to go into business and finance.
The perception was that unless you were a highly paid
professional, you could not live a fulfilled, free life. “It’s not
healthy,” he told me, and he was right. He was agreeing with
the analyses of the philosophers and scholars, but rather than
observing an ideological trend, he saw how the shift played
out concretely in young adults’ career choices. He was old
enough to see the shift froma largely modern to a more
postmodern understanding of work.
The most obvious effect of the postmodern “meanswithout-an-end” idolatry (at the time of this writing) is the
widespread deception, fraud, and self-interested actions of
financial companies, revealed in the recession of 2008 and its
aftermath. Naomi Wolf, writing in the British daily newspaper
The Guardian, reviewed what could be seen just in the
newspaper headlines of June and July 2012. She goes down the
list: Barclays Bank and others colluding to manipulate interest
rates; the HSBC banking group fined one billion dollars for not
preventing money laundering (“a highly profitable activity not
to prevent”) between 2004 and 2010; 215 million dollars of
customer money “missing” at Peregrine Capital, whose founder
faces criminal charges after a suicide attempt; Wells Fargo
agreeing to pay 175 million dollars in fines for (“again, very
lucratively”) automatically charging African American and
Hispanic mortgagees costlier rates on their subprime
mortgages than white people with identical credit ratings. Bank
of America and SunTrust were also fined for the same practice.
The 2008 recession itself, of course, was triggered by bankers
profiting fromthe sales of enormous numbers of mortgages
that were packaged in ways that concealed their low
underlying value.
The conclusion of this sad litany is found in the subtitle of
Wolf’s article: “The media’s ‘bad apple’ thesis no longer
works. We’re seeing systemic corruption in banking—and
systemic collusion.”
143
Those with more politically liberalsensibilities are quick to
perceive the postmodern idols of “means without ends” in the
area of business. They are not as sensitive to the even more
pervasive problemthat we now get a sense of self not fromour
roles in family and society, but as consumers. We are
encouraged to create a persona through the brands we choose
to purchase and the identity we are able to construct for
ourselves online.
This phenomenon has an especially profound impact on
the fields of media, entertainment, and marketing. I have
spoken to many of my church members in marketing and
advertising about the shift away fromadvertising the benefits
of products in favor of advertising a life story that promises the
consumer an enhanced identity and a higher quality of life.
Yale philosopher Nicholas Wolterstorff observes that modern
culture defines the happy life as a life that is “going well”—full
of experiential pleasure—while to the ancients, the happy life
meant the life that is lived well, with character, courage,
humility, love, and justice.144 So all who work in marketing and
promotion will be expected to promise people not merely that
their products will work satisfactorily, but also that they will
bring themhappiness.
I spoke to a man and woman who both were advertising
executives and were thinking of leaving their respective
companies. The woman’s firmhad just two major clients, and
both were cosmetics companies. “The message they want me
to send about our products—that this will help you finally find
love and love yourself—is toxic.” The man worked for an
agency with a sports car company for a client. He was under
pressure, not for the first time, to market his car as a means to
sexappeal. Both workers pushed back and got strong
resistance in return. The man kept his job because he changed
the message from“sexappeal” to “high-performance vehicle”
and did it so skillfully and compellingly that the client and his
company were satisfied. The woman, however, did not succeed
and had to leave her firm, going into business for herself.
Christians agree that when we sell and market, we need to
show potential customers that a product “adds value” to their
lives. That doesn’t mean it can give thema life. But because
Christians have a deeper understanding of human well-being,
we will often find ourselves swimming against the very strong
currents of the corporate idols of our culture.
Finding Hope for Our Work
We have been describing what work was designed to be and
what has gone wrong with it. Even if we find ourselves doing
the kind of work we want and in the best sorts of work
environments, the broken nature of work seems overwhelming.
“What hope is there for work? How can we put work right?” we
may ask. How do we look past the deep problems and realize
God’s purpose and plan? Is that a realistic goal, or is it just a
nice idea that has no bearing on tomorrow’s meeting or next
year’s career change?
We can begin to answer these questions only by first
settling one sure fact: Nothing will be put perfectly right, as St.
Paulsays, until the “day of Christ” at the end of history
(Philippians 1:6; 3:12). Until then all creation “groans” (Romans
8:22) and is subject to decay and weakness. So work will be put
completely right only when heaven is reunited with earth and
we find ourselves in our “true country.” To talk about fully
redeeming work is sometimes naïvete, sometimes hubris.
Yet all is not lost. The transcendent hope depicted so
poignantly in “Leaf by Niggle,” and the ecstatic vision of what
creative endeavor will then be like, can go a long way to
helping us work with satisfaction within the limits of this world.
The Christian gospel decidedly furnishes us with the resources
for more inspired, realistic, satisfying, and faithful work today.
How?
First, the gospel provides an alternate story line for our
work; this is vital because all work is propelled by a worldview
or a narrative account of what human life is all about and what
will help us thrive.
Second, the Christian faith gives us a new and rich
conception of work as partnering with God in his love and care
for the world. This biblical conception helps us appreciate all
work, fromthe most simple to the most complex, by both
believers and nonbelievers. So Christians who grasp a biblical
theology of work learn not only to value and participate in the
work of all people but to also see ways to work distinctively as
Christians.
Third, the gospel gives us a particularly sensitive new
moral compass, through a host of sound ethical guidelines to
help us make decisions, as well as wise counsel about human
hearts.
Finally, the gospel radically changes our motives for work
and fills us with a new and durable inner power that will be with
us through thick and thin.145
Most books and programs that help people integrate their
faith with their work tend to focus on only one or two of these
factors. Some, for example, emphasize the first. They take a
somewhat academic tack and constitute theological principles
into a “Christian approach” to art, government, economics, and
so on. Some concentrate almost completely on the second.
They fear that an overemphasis on a biblical worldview in work
leads to triumphalismand fails to appreciate God’s broad
providential activity. Others take a more personal and
experiential approach, inviting people to encounter Christ in a
new way and emphasizing the inner power that comes froma
gospel-transformed heart. Still others fear that focus on innerheart transformation puts all the weight on personal peace and
success and ignores the social-justice implications of the
gospel, in which Christians are responsible to serve others
through their work.
But all of these emphases and concerns are correct—and in
the final part of the book, we seek to show that they are
ultimately complementary and very practical. Indeed one of the
reasons the Bible’s view of work is so compelling and so
helpful in all cultures, socialsettings, and vocations is because
it is so rich and multidimensional.
PART THREE
The Gospel and Work
NINE
A New Story for Work
So whether you eat or drink or whatever you do, do
it all for the glory of God.
1 Corinthians 10:31
Making Sense of the World
People cannot make sense of anything without attaching it to a
story line. After the attacks of September 11, 2001, no one
mentioned the event without placing it into some kind of
narrative structure. Some said, “This is the result of America’s
abuse of its imperial power in the world.” Others said, “There
are many evil people out there who hate us because we are a
good and free country.” Depending on which story you
believed, you would be associated with the antagonists or the
protagonists, and your response—both emotions and actions —would be completely different.
A classic illustration of the need for stories comes from
philosopher Alasdair MacIntyre in his book After Virtue. He
asks that you imagine you are standing at a bus stop when a
young man you do not know comes up to you and says, “The
name of the common wild duck is Histrionicus histrionicus
histrionicus.” Even though you understand the sentence, his
action makes no sense. What does it mean? The only way to
make sense of it is to try to learn the story into which this
event fits. Perhaps the young man is mentally ill; that would
explain it. Or what if yesterday someone of your gender, age,
height, and general appearance had approached the young
man in the library, asking himthe Latin word for the wild duck,
and today he had mistaken you for that person? That would
explain it too. Or perhaps the young man is a foreign spy
“waiting at a prearranged rendezvous and uttering the illchosen code sentence which will identify himto his contact.”
The first story is sad, the second is comic, and the third is
dramatic. But the point is, without a handle on the story,
there’s no way to understand the meaning of what happened
and no way to know how to answer the man.146
If you call the police when it was a simple case of mistaken
identity, it will be very embarrassing. If you pick a fight with
someone who is a trained assassin, the result will be even
worse! But in any case, if you get the story wrong, your
response will be wrong. And if you get the story of the world
wrong—if, for example, you see life here as mainly about selfactualization and self-fulfillment rather than the love of God—
you will get your life responses wrong, including the way you
go about your work.
Stories and Worldviews
What are the elements of a story? While there are many good
scholarly analyses of narrative structure, here is a simple way
to put it.147 A story begins when something knocks life off
balance. Then the story progresses, or the plot “thickens,” as
the protagonists struggle to restore that balance and peace
while antagonistic forces block and resist them. Finally, the
story ends as the struggle results in either the restoration of
balance or the failure to recover it.
So for a story to be a story, there must be a problemthat
makes life not as it ought to be. If we say, “Little Red Riding
Hood took some food to her grandmother and they ate it
together,” we might have a charming description, but it is
hardly a story, since it has no plot.148 A story must also have
some concept and possibility of things being put right. “Little
Red Riding Hood was at her grandmother’s house, but a wolf
broke in and ate themboth”—a more dramatic set of facts, but
again, it’s not a story. So a story must have an account of how
life should be, an explanation of how it got thrown off balance,
and some proposed solution as to what will put life right again.
Now, the significance of stories is this. While many stories
are often no more than entertainment, narratives are actually so
foundational to how we think that they determine how we
understand and live life itself. The term“worldview,” fromthe
German word Weltanschauung, means the comprehensive
perspective fromwhich we interpret all of reality. But a
worldview is not merely a set of philosophical bullet points. It
is essentially a master narrative, a fundamentalstory about (a)
what human life in the world should be like, (b) what has
knocked it off balance, and (c) what can be done to make it
right.149 No one can really function in the world without some
working answers to those big questions, and so, to provide
those answers, we adopt a world-story, a narrative that
explains things—a worldview.
Everyone knows that things in this world are seriously out
of whack. No one claims that his or her own life is as it should
be, let alone the whole world. There is something wrong within
us. Nothing ever seems to make us happy or fulfilled except in
the most fleeting way. There is also wrong among us. The
world is filled with poverty, war, suffering, and injustice.
Something seems to have knocked the whole world off balance.
But what is it? Who deserves the blame? And what is the
solution? As soon as you begin to answer these questions,
you arrive at a story that you will begin to live out. We are
wired to move through our lives chasing and rehearsing
narratives that will promise to bring the world back into
balance.
MacIntyre argues that human actions are “enacted
narrative.” All people are living out some mental world-story
that gives their lives meaning.150 That story may be about the
struggle of a just cause like saving the environment, or your
personal quest to find true love or to be successful despite
adverse social origins and expectations. Or perhaps the story is
one of freedomand equality, in which you are bringing a family
froman oppressive situation into a new country and new life.
Maybe the drama is one in which you forge your own unique
sexual, cultural, or political identity against the prejudices of
others. In each case you are putting yourself into a larger story
that assumes the world would be a better place if more people
were doing what you were doing. You may believe the world
would be dramatically improved if everyone were free-spirited
and progressive and willing to defy oppressive traditions. Or
perhaps you think the world would be far better off if we were
standing for proven moral absolutes. In each case, the person
assumes he or she is a protagonist, one of the good people
contributing to the way the world ought to be.
Worldviews, however, are not private or unique. In fact,
whole groups and cultures have their own preferred worldstory with generally accepted answers to the big questions and
shared idols that heighten the drama. Leslie Stevenson’s
classic book, Seven Theories of Human Nature, lists influential
views of human nature pioneered by prominent thinkers who
influenced whole societies. Plato saw our main problemas
being the physical body and its weakness; for Marxit was
unjust economic systems; for Freud it was inner unconscious
conflicts between desire and conscience; for Sartre it was not
realizing we are completely free since there are no objective
values; for B.F. Skinner it was not realizing we are completely
determined by our environment; and for Konrad Lorenz it was
our innate aggression because of our evolutionary past.151
Each of these theories is really a story—of what is wrong with
us and what we can do about it. And each of these views of
reality has been enormously powerful, influencing societies
and fields of inquiry and work. When any one of these
worldviews grips the imagination of a culture, it has a profound
influence on how life is lived, even for those who do not accept
that worldview.
One of the main places that we personally live out the
drama of our personal and social narratives is in our daily work.
Our worldview places our work in the context of a history, a
cause, a quest, and a set of protagonists and antagonists, and
in so doing it frames the strategy of our work at a high level. At
a day-to-day level, our worldview willshape our individual
interactions and decisions.
As we read in the foreword, Katherine Alsdorf was given a
new story—the gospel—that was different fromthe dominant
story of Silicon Valley, which evangelized fervently and
optimistically about the power of technology to change the
world for the better. The advertising executives we mentioned
in the last chapter worked amid a story in which selfexpression, sexual pleasure, and affluence were the meaning of
life, and survival of the fittest was just the way life works. The
gospel, however, teaches that the meaning of life is to love God
and love our neighbor, and that the operating principle is
servanthood. These contrasts may sound at first rather high
and abstract, but they became very practical when these two
executives crafted messages in their advertising.
The Gospel and Other Worldviews
We have said that any worldview consists of posing and
answering three questions:
1. How are things supposed to be?
2. What is the main problemwith things as they are?
3. What is the solution and how can it be realized?
Stevenson’s book on human nature includes Christianity
among its “theories,” but the author points out how different
Christianity is fromthe alternatives. He observes that “If God
has made man for fellowship with Himself, and if man has
turned away and broken his relationship to God, then only God
can forgive man and restore the relationship.”
152
In other
words, the biblical worldview uniquely understands the nature,
problem, and salvation of humankind as fundamentally
relational. We were made for a relationship with God, we lost
our relationship with God through sin against him, and we can
be brought back into that relationship through his salvation
and grace.
Plato, Marx, and Freud identify some part of the created
world as the main problemand some other part of the created
world as the main solution. The protagonists and antagonists
of their respective world-stories are played by finite things.
Thus, Marxismassumes that our problems come fromgreedy
capitalists who won’t share the means of economic production
with the people. The solution is a totalitarian state. Freud, on
the other hand, believed that our problems come from
repression of deep desires for pleasure. The villains are played
by the repressive moral “gatekeepers” in society, like the
church. The solution is the unrepressed freedomof the
individual. Many people have a worldview that to some degree
is indebted to the Greeks and Plato. They think the problem
with the world rests in undisciplined, selfish people who won’t
submit to traditional moral values and responsibilities. The
solution is a “revival” of religion, morality, and virtue in
society.
Philosopher Al Wolters writes:
The great danger is to always single out some aspect
of God’s good creation and identify it, rather than the
alien intrusion of sin, as the villain. Such an error
conceives of the good-evil dichotomy as intrinsic to
the creation itself . . . something in the good creation
is identified as [the source] of evil. In the course of
history, this “something” has been variously
identified as . . . the body and its passions (Plato and
much of Greek philosophy), as culture in distinction
fromnature (Rousseau and Romanticism), as
authority figures in society and family
(psychodynamic psychology), as economic forces
(Marx), as technology and management (Heidegger
and existentialists). . . . As far as I can tell, the Bible is
unique in its rejection of all attempts to either
demonize some part of creation as the root of our
problems or to idolize some part of creation as the
solution. All other religions, philosophies, and
worldviews in one way or another fall into the trap of
[idolatry]—of failing to keep creation and fall distinct.
And this trap is an ever-present danger for Christians
[as well].153
Look again at the uniqueness of Christianity. Only the
Christian worldview locates the problemwith the world not in
any part of the world or in any particular group of people but in
sin itself (our loss of relationship with God). And it locates the
solution in God’s grace (our restoration of a relationship with
God through the work of Christ). Sin infects us all, and so we
cannot simply divide the world into the heroes and the villains.
(And if we did, we would certainly have to count ourselves
among the latter as well as the former.) Without an
understanding of the gospel, we will be either naïvely utopian
or cynically disillusioned. We will be demonizing something
that isn’t bad enough to explain the mess we are in; and we will
be idolizing something that isn’t powerful enough to get us out
of it. This is, in the end, what all other worldviews do.
The Christian story line works beautifully to make sense of
things and even to help us appreciate the truth embedded in
stories that clearly come fromanother worldview. The Christian
story line, or worldview, is: creation (plan), fall (problem),
redemption and restoration (solution):
The whole world is good. God made the world and
everything in it was good. There are no intrinsically
evil parts of the world. Nothing is evil in its origin. As
Tolkien explained about his archvillain in the Lord of
the Rings trilogy, in the beginning “even Sauron was
not so.” You can find this “creational good” in
anything.
The whole world is fallen. There is no aspect of the
world affected by sin more or less than any other. For
example, are emotion and passions untrustworthy
and reason infallible? Is the physical bad and the
spiritual good? Is the day-to-day world profane but
religious observances good? None of these are true;
but non-Christian story lines must adopt some
variations of these in order to villainize and even
demonize some created thing instead of sin.
The whole world is going to be redeemed. Jesus is
going to redeemspirit and body, reason and emotion,
people and nature. There is no part of reality for
which there is no hope.
The gospel is the true story that God made a good world
that was marred by sin and evil, but through Jesus Christ he
redeemed it at infinite cost to himself, so that someday he will
return to renew all creation; end allsuffering and death; and
restore absolute peace, justice, and joy in the world forever.
The vast implications of this gospel worldview—about the
character of God, the goodness of the material creation, the
value of the human person, the fallenness of all people and all
things, the primacy of love and grace, the importance of justice
and truth, the hope of redemption—affect everything, and
especially our work.
Here’s an example. Early in his career as a school
administrator, our friend Bill Kurtz started to see that this
gospelstory line—what the world should be, how it had gone
wrong, and the hope for the future—gave hima better vision
for education in poor inner-city schools. All the individual
stories of brokenness—of problems at home, of no sleep and
inadequate nutrition, of gangs on the street and drugs in the
building—had reinforced a culture of rebellion and
hopelessness in the schools. The attitude about school for
many of the kids was “why bother.” He wanted to bring the
hope of the gospelstory into his work.
Now in the field of urban education today there are many
competing story lines about what education should be, what
its main problemis, and what needs to change. As a matter of
fact, education itself is often viewed as the savior for the ills of
poverty and systemic injustice. Students are the subjects of
continuous analysis as one strategy or another is applied to
their educational experience. Bill found that the gospel gave
hima more comprehensive understanding of the problems
facing the schools and a hope for redemption that incorporated
some of the best practices of his field but did not idolize them.
His approach has been holistic, with the recognition that
the gospel could actually shape the culture of a school
community. In 2004 he launched a public charter high school in
Denver to serve a very diverse student population. One grade
at a time he helped create a culture of shared accountability
and success in the school. Every morning students gather,
along with their teachers, for morning meeting. Morning
meetings provide an opportunity for the community to
celebrate success through weekly awards, by giving shoutouts to one another for acts of service and living the school’s
values, and by sharing stories that point to a story of hope.
But the brokenness is addressed as well. To help change
behaviors where students fail to live the values of the
community, students participate in public apologies where they
hold one another accountable and support one another to live
the school’s core values better. If a student or teacher is late to
school, they apologize to the rest of the community. He
recognized the students’ innate need to be known but held
accountable and created en environment where no one could
be lost in the cracks. While good teachers have certainly been
key, Bill attributes the school’s success to its culture and their
shared, singular goal to get 100 percent of its seniors into fouryear colleges. The school has seen amazing success—every
single senior in the school’s history has earned a four-year
college acceptance. This first school has grown into a network
of sixtop-performing schools across Denver.
The Gospel and Business
The gospel worldview will have all kinds of influence—
profound and mundane, strategic and tactical—on how you
actually do your work. Every field of work is to some degree
influenced by alternate worldviews and their attendant idols,
each assigning ultimate value to some idol—that doesn’t fully
take into consideration our sin or God’s grace. The particulars
of how the gospel works out in each field are endlessly rich—
in fact, hundreds of people meet each month at Redeemer to
discuss these very ideas within their respective fields. So,
while these ideas deserve book-length treatments in their own
right, let me sketch here the outlines of the gospel implications
in just a few fields of work.
What are some of the idols of business, for example?
Money and power certainly top the list. But remember that an
idol is a good thing that we make into an ultimate thing.
Corporate profits and influence, stewarded wisely, are a
healthy means to a good end: They are vital to creating new
products to serve customers, giving an adequate return to
investors for the use of their money, and paying employees
well for their work. Similarly, individual compensation is an
appropriate reward for one’s contributions and is necessary to
provide for oneself and one’s family. But it is not our identity,
our salvation, or even our source of security and comfort. The
Christian worker or business leader who has experienced God’s
grace—who knows “You are not your own; you were bought
at a price” (1 Corinthians 6:19–20)—is free to honor God, love
neighbors, and serve the common good through work. In fact,
at Redeemer we believe this idea is so important for life in the
city that we work with entrepreneurs and offer classes to help
themthink through how the story of the gospelshapes their
vision for their new venture. Whether it’s a for-profit business,
a nonprofit, or an arts venture, we point each entrepreneur to a
vision of serving a need in a way that reflects God’s plan for
the world.
We find and share examples of good leaders—Christian
and otherwise—who balance the interests of all the company’s
stakeholders:stockholders, customers, employees, suppliers,
and even the surrounding community. Milton Hershey, for
example, founded the Hershey Chocolate Company in 1903
with the innovation of putting milk into the chocolate bar. The
company prospered, as did all the dairy farmers in the
surrounding countryside. When the Depression hit and
business fell apart, Hershey committed to not lay off his
employees. Instead he created his own public works projects in
the town and put the employees to work building houses, an
amusement park, and a hotel. Toward the end of his life, he and
his wife (who were childless) founded a boarding school for
orphans to give thempractical life skills within a supportive
community. The trust that runs the school owns a large portion
of the company stock, so today the school is funded by
dividends and stock appreciation.
At one level, this should allseemto go without saying. The
idea that businesses should advance the social good has been
regaining its proper place in the last decade, helped along by
the string of business scandals in recent years. As a case in
point, in a 2009 speech James Murdoch, son of News Corp.
Chief Executive Rupert Murdoch, told the audience at the
Edinburgh Television Festival that the “only reliable and
perpetual guarantor of independence is profit.” Yet in the wake
of the phone-hacking scandal at News Corp.’s UK newspaper
unit, his sister Elisabeth Murdoch could say to the same
audience three years later that her brother “left something out,”
declaring “profit without purpose is a recipe for disaster.” She
went on to say, “Personally, I believe one of the biggest
lessons of the past year has been the need for any organization
to discuss, affirmand institutionalize a rigorous set of values
based on an explicit statement of purpose.”
154
Yet despite this growing consensus, it is probably fair to
say that the implicit assumptions in the marketplace are that
making money is the main thing in life, that business is
fundamentally about accumulating and wielding power, and
that maximizing profit within legal limits is an end in itself. The
reason is that sin runs through the heart of every worker and
the culture of every enterprise. The result is polluted rivers,
poor service, unjust compensation, entitlement attitudes, deadend jobs, dehumanizing bureaucracy, backstabbing, and power
grabs. This is why it is so important for us to be intentional in
applying the counter-narrative of the gospel to business.
While fromthe outside there might not be immediately
noticeable differences between a well-run company reflecting a
gospel worldview and one reflecting primarily the world-story
of the marketplace, inside the differences could be very
noticeable. The gospel-centered business would have a
discernible vision for serving the customer in some unique
way, a lack of adversarial relationships and exploitation, an
extremely strong emphasis on excellence and product quality,
and an ethical environment that goes “all the way down” to the
bottomof the organizational chart and to the realities of daily
behavior, even when high ethics mean a loss of margin. In the
business animated by the gospel worldview, profit is simply
one of many important bottomlines.
My friend Don Flow has overlaid the story line of the
gospel on the prevalent worldview of the automotive
dealership business. The typical narrative in an auto dealership
is to sell each car for the highest price you can, and so sales
people are rewarded for identifying and wooing the highest
paying customers. Don’s vision emphasized the value of a
good automobile to each and every customer. But he
discovered a problem: Women and minorities were paying more
for their cars than more negotiation-savvy white males. He
decided to set a flat-rate on all cars—no negotiating—to effect
equal opportunity pricing.
Now, Don was the owner of his company and had the
authority to make major changes. Most people do not have this
freedom. Yet one of the things less senior employees can do is
ask questions about the company’s mission and, if it is a
sound one, treat it seriously and help keep it in the
conversation. Leaders often feel overwhelmed by the cynicism
and apathy of their employees and lose their drive to hold true
to the company’s values. Your care and commitment to those
values, assuming they are good ones, could be just the
encouragement your boss needs.
To be a Christian in business, then, means much more than
just being honest or not sleeping with your coworkers. It even
means more than personal evangelismor holding a Bible study
at the office. Rather, it means thinking out the implications of
the gospel worldview and God’s purposes for your whole work
life—and for the whole of the organization under your
influence.
The Gospel and Journalism
We must think out the Christian worldview’s implications in
every field, and often those implications are subtle. For
example, does the gospel have an impact on how you do
journalism? You could say, “No, I just report facts objectively.”
But there is no “view fromnowhere.” Even the choice of what
is reported on as news reflects someone’s values and beliefs
about what is important. This is why we can readily identify the
editorialstrategy, or bias, of every journalistic outlet: This one
is progressive, while that one is conservative; this one idolizes
innovation, while that one idolizes wealth; and this other one
idolizes self-determination. Furthermore, if success is too
important to a journalist—if it functions as an idol in his or her
life—then that goal will color the filter of what they decide to
report on and how they write about it.
It is impossible to do a story without heroes and villains.
The best journalists do a good job of reporting empirical facts
as objectively as possible. But the facts you play up and the
ones you play down or leave out, and how you relate themto
one another—all this is done in the service of a background
narrative filled with assumptions about which forces in the
world are good and which are bad. It is seldomdifficult, if you
pay attention, to see that narrative at work in how the story is
presented. Some have argued convincingly that the field of
journalism, like many vocational fields, has a “religious”
character to it, with sets of doctrines and folkways that are
enforced by a kind of priesthood.155
What might Christian journalists do differently? I would
argue that the gospel worldview—which does not idolize or
demonize anything in creation—can uniquely equip a journalist
to be even-handed and open-minded in his or her reporting and
writing. As we observed above, every other worldview tends
to put too much faith in some things and too little in others. So
whatever the basic worldview of a journalist, it will lead to
being more naïvely positive or unnecessarily cynical and
skeptical than if they held the gospel worldview.
Let me offer a simple example. In most stories of crisis our
modern, cause-and-effect worldview very quickly seeks
someone or something to blame. After Hurricane Katrina hit
New Orleans there was a finite period of time in which the basic
news of devastation was reported. Very quickly, the story
devolved into attempts to cast blame: on the builders of the sea
wall or the federal government and its slow response. Not to
say that flaws in city planning or unresponsive government
agencies aren’t problems worthy of reporting, but the need to
blame some aspect of creation is a human impulse—not a
gospel one. The gospel tells us the fall results in brokenness in
nature and in people. The real “story” of the gospel is the
evidence of redemption and renewal. The stories of sacrifice
and perseverance are a more fitting culmination of the gospel
narrative than stories of neglect.
The Gospel and Higher Education
Andrew Delbanco’s fine book College: What It Was, Is, and
Should Be explains how changes in our culture’s dominant
worldviews have led to crises in the area of higher education.
He notes that older worldviews (both Christian and GrecoRoman) believed that much important wisdomhad to be
rediscovered afresh by new generations as they wrestled with
older texts about how to understand and live well in the world.
Today we are more influenced heavily by the Enlightenment
view, which saw only empirical and scientific knowledge as
true in the highest sense. “This way of evaluating the worth of
knowledge . . . poses a severe challenge to the humanities—at
least to the extent that humanists remain concerned with
preserving truth by rearticulating it rather than advancing truth
by discarding the old in favor of the new.”
156 C.S. Lewis put
the same idea like this:
For the wise men of old the cardinal problemhad
been how to conformthe soul to reality, and the
solution had been knowledge, self-discipline, and
virtue. For . . . applied science . . . the problemis how
to subdue reality to the wishes of men; the solution is
a technique.157
Delbanco shows how this change in worldview is having a
direct negative impact on the study of humanities in Western
societies, which he argues is crucial to developing people
capable of “reflective citizenship.” Elsewhere in his book he
laments how a college education is becoming increasingly
inaccessible to those without means. The intense competition
for a relatively small number of openings in the great
universities of our country means that only those very well
prepared, tutored, counseled, and financed can get in. Students
frompoorer communities cannot hope to get the same kind of
support. Increasingly, the best education enables the elite
classes to simply perpetuate themselves and leave the rest of
the population behind. Not only are there fewer poor students
getting into elite schools, there is a widening gap between top
academic institutions and much of the middle class, who see
these institutions as arrogant and out of touch with the values
and experience of ordinary people. Underlying all these trends
is the modern idea of meritocracy—the belief that those who
get into the good schools deserve to be there because they are
the best and the brightest. In a New York Times op-ed piece,
“A Smug Education?” Delbanco points out that there is some
truth to the charge that when students make it into the most
selective universities, they are taught that others who could
not get in are beneath them, which breeds “smugness and selfsatisfaction.”
Remarkably, the Columbia professor points out that the
original founders of Ivy League schools were “stringent
Protestants” who believed “the mark of salvation was not high
self-esteembut humbling awareness of one’s lowliness in the
eyes of God. . . . Those whomGod favors are granted grace not
for any worthiness of their own, but by God’s unmerited
mercy.”
158 Delbanco is not himself a Christian, and he hopes
that our secular culture can come up with some basis upon
which to humble our elites, but he is clear-eyed in his
recognition that the Christian worldview has the resources to
keep the egos of the successful and wealthy in check, which is
an enormous boost to social cohesion. But today the Christian
idea—that no one deserves a good life, that all wealth and
talent and power are only a gift of God—has largely been lost
in our culture, and the “dark side of our meritocracy” is now
creating greater inequities than existed before.
This is all highly suggestive for Christian educators and
any others who work in the realmof ideas. In future decades, it
may be that Catholic and Protestant colleges will be in the
forefront of the preservation and recovery of the humanities—
as the monasteries saved the works of ancient literature during
the Middle Ages. Christian educators should be motivated by
the gospel to find ways to resist the enormous economic
pressures that are today working against both the quality and
accessibility of higher education.
The Gospel and the Arts
The art world also has its idols, to be sure. As in any field,
some artists will make financial profit the ultimate value and do
their work accordingly. And, in general, those who play to the
crowd, as it were, produce work that is highly sentimental and
saccharine, or filled with shock value, gratuitous sex, and
violence. Many artists disdain colleagues who make art for
profit; instead they uphold self-expression, originality, and
freedomas the ultimate values controlling the work they do.
But their self-righteous attitudes betray the fact that there are
deep worldviews in play—each with its own sets of demons,
idols, heroes, orthodoxies, and redemptive pursuits.159 Often
the artists most disdainful of the public produce art that is, to
put it mildly, a great deal of beauty and hope.
How does Christianity affect an artist’s work? This has
been and will continue to be a worthy topic for entire books.
But in short, the gospel worldview equips the artist, as it does
the journalist, for a unique combination of optimismand realism
about life. The gospel is more globally pessimistic about
human nature than virtually any other view of things. There is
no one class or group of people responsible for the world’s
situation; we all are responsible. Each of us is capable of the
worst kind of evil, and there is nothing we can do to change
ourselves, or even see ourselves in our true light, without
God’s help. And yet, on the basis of God’s salvation in Christ,
the gospel allows us to be at the same time deeply optimistic,
envisioning not simply heaven but a perfectly renewed material
creation. So artists shaped by the gospel cannot be
characterized either by sentimentality or bitter hopelessness.
For example, the movie Lost in Translation assumes that
life is ultimately meaningless but afford some small comfort in
friendship; the movie Babe inspires us that even a pig can be a
sheepdog if he defies tradition and tries hard enough. I believe
that Christians can appreciate either kind of story, if it is well
told, because froma gospel perspective, both naive and
cynicalstories are partly true. Life in this fallen world is to a
great degree meaningless, our aspirations are constantly being
frustrated, and sometimes the respectable people are
oppressive and bigoted. And yet there is a Good that will
triumph over Evil in the end. Froma Christian perspective the
problemwith both kinds of stories is that they tend to blame
problems on things besides sin and identify salvation in things
besides God—and therefore are ultimately too simplistic. The
richness of the gospel world-story includes the insights of
both darker and more sanguine worldviews, and it weaves them
into a larger tapestry so that neither overwhelms the whole
picture. Christian artists have access to a broader and more
balanced vision of the world, which is why, over the centuries,
that vision has produced such great works of art.
The Gospel and Medicine
To let the gospel of Jesus shape how we work means to heed
the influence of both the psychological idols within our hearts
as well as the sociological idols in our culture and
profession.160 For an example of this I will turn to the field of
medicine. Some years ago I did an informalsurvey of several
Christians in the medical profession. I asked them, “What are
the factors inherent in the practice of medicine today that make
it difficult to work as a Christian in this field? What are the main
temptations and tests?” I was surprised, instructed, and helped
by the answers I received.
One of the main problems mentioned was a deeply personal
one—the great temptation to lose sight of your identity in your
profession. The British preacher Martyn Lloyd-Jones was
previously a successful physician in London. In one of his
lectures to medicalstudents and doctors, he said candidly,
“there are many whomI have had the privilege of meeting
whose tombstones might well bear the grimepitaph . . . ‘born a
man, died a doctor’! The greatest danger which confronts the
[medical professional] is that he may become lost in his
profession . . . this is the special temptation of the doctor. . .
.”
161 Another British doctor added:
. . . the temptation [is] for medicine to take over your
life and rule your life as an enslaving power. It’s a
subtle one because . . . there is a kind of moral ego
massage because you are giving so much—hours,
responsibility, stress—to do so much good in other
people’s lives. There’s a lot of self-justifying power
in that kind of idolatry. It’s much easier to feel morally
superior as a doctor than as a stockbroker. . . . There
is also, in some people, the need to be needed and
the power buzz you get fromhaving influence. . . .162
Those in the helping professions (and that includes
pastoral ministry as well as medicine) are tempted to feel
superior because our work is so noble and so draining. And
although medical professionals pour themselves out in long,
stressful hours and literally save lives, they meet plenty of
ungrateful, unreasonable, and stubborn people who repay their
hard work with venomand lawsuits. This can lead to a
correlative spiritual peril. One doctor wrote:
It is easy to become extremely cynical about people
and emotionally hardened to life. You see so much of
the messy stuff of life and death that you feel your
essential defense mechanismis to become
emotionally detached and keep a distance in order to
maintain your sanity.
Several doctors told me that only the gospel enabled them
to see the traits of pride, cynicism, and detachment that were
creeping into their characters. One said, “In the early days of a
medical career you work such enormous hours that your prayer
life just dries up. That is deadly. Only if Jesus stays real to the
heart can you be consistently joyful enough in himto avoid
making medicine your whole self-worth, and then becoming
hardened when you meet so much ingratitude.”
My survey also revealed pressures on doctors that came
fromthe culture. One woman I corresponded with pointed me
to an article in The New England Journal of Medicine titled
“God at the Bedside.”
163 The author was a doctor who often
found that patients’ spiritual beliefs and practices were very
much a factor in their health issues, but “in the modern era,
religion and science are understood as sharply divided, the two
occupying very different domains.” He wrote that he often
found that patients’ guilt and fears were factors in their illness
and also that their faith in God was part of how they healed,
but he felt completely unprepared by his training to address
any of these realities. “Doctors,” he wrote, “understandably
are leery of moving outside the strictly clinical and venturing
into the spiritual realm.”
Dr. Martyn Lloyd-Jones makes the same point in one of his
lectures to medical professionals. Lloyd-Jones was on staff at
Saint Bart’s in London under the famous chief of staff Lord
Horder in the late 1920s. At one point the junior physician was
asked by Lord Horder to rearrange and reclassify his case
history records. He created a new filing system, arranging the
cases not by name but by diagnosis and treatment. As LloydJones did this task he was astonished that Horder’s diagnostic
notes in well over half the cases included comments such as
“works far too hard,” “drinks too much,” “unhappy in home
and marriage.” At one point he spent the weekend with Lord
Horder and took the opportunity to ask himabout what he had
seen in the case files. Horder responded that he reckoned only
about a third of the problems that are brought to a physician
are strictly medical—the rest are due to or aggravated by
anxiety and stress, poor life choices, and unrealistic goals and
beliefs about themselves. Severe cases, of course, could be
sent to the psychiatrist, but most of the time that wasn’t
appropriate. So, Horder concluded, a doctor should basically
mind his or her own business. Lloyd-Jones said that after he
heard that response:
. . . we argued for the whole of the weekend! My
contention was that we should be treating [the whole
of the person’s life]. “Ah,” said Horder, “that is
where you are wrong! If these people like to pay us
our fees for more or less doing nothing, then let them
do so. We can then concentrate on the 35 percent or
so of real medicine.” But my contention was that to
treat these other people [taking into account their
whole life] was “real medicine” also. All of themwere
really sick. They certainly were not well! They have
gone to the doctor—perhaps more than one—in
quest of help.164
Lloyd-Jones was not proposing that physicians were by
themselves competent to do this, but rather that together with
other counselors and helping professionals they needed to
address the whole person. People have a spiritual nature, a
moral nature, and a social nature, and if any of these are
violated by unwise or wrong beliefs, behaviors, and choices,
there can be interlocking physical and emotional breakdown.
And even patients whose original illness was caused by
strictly physical factors eventually need much more than mere
medicine to recuperate and heal.
That conversation took place in 1927, but two trends have
only exacerbated the situation that Horder and Lloyd-Jones
were addressing. First, there has been an enormous increase in
specialization, so that no single helping professional ever
seems to have the luxury of looking at the whole person. Just
as important is the growth in influence of a view that has been
called “evolutionary social constructivism,” which believes
that “all aspects of every level of reality [have] a single
evolutionary explanation.”
165
In effect, the very concept of the
whole person is vanishing. Our consciousness and emotion,
our choices and desires, our goals and joys are increasingly
seen to be the results of our genetic hardwiring. The old idea of
a person consisting of body, mind, and spirit is gone—now
there is only a body that has mental, emotional, and spiritual
neurology. In addition to this reductionistic understanding of
human nature, the increasing economic and legal pressures on
doctors and hospitals are likely to push medical professionals
more cautiously to “mind their own business” when it comes to
treating the whole person.
Because they understand the effects of both creation and
fall on the human person, Christians in the medical profession
can resist the narrowing implications of this view. The
Christian view of human nature is rich and multifaceted. God
created and will resurrect our bodies—and so they are
important! If God himself is to redeemour bodies (Romans 8:23)
then he is the Great Physician, and the medical vocation could
not be loftier. But God does not care only about bodies; he
created and redeems our souls as well. So Christian physicians
will always bear the totality of the human person in mind. Their
faith gives themthe resources to muster the humility and the
ingenuity necessary to see patients as more than just bodies.
The Christian Worldview Shapes All Work
So when we say that Christians work froma gospel worldview,
it does not mean that they are constantly speaking about
Christian teaching in their work. Some people think of the
gospel as something we are principally to “look at” in our work.
This would mean that Christian musicians should play
Christian music, Christian writers should write stories about
conversion, and Christian businessmen and -women should
work for companies that make Christian-themed products and
services for Christian customers. Yes, some Christians in those
fields would sometimes do well to do those things, but it is a
mistake to think that the Christian worldview is operating only
when we are doing such overtly Christian activities. Instead,
think of the gospel as a set of glasses through which you
“look” at everything else in the world. Christian artists, when
they do this faithfully, will not be completely beholden either to
profit or to naked self-expression; and they will tell the widest
variety of stories. Christians in business willsee profit as only
one of several bottomlines; and they will work passionately for
any kind of enterprise that serves the common good. The
Christian writer can constantly be showing the destructiveness
of making something besides God into the central thing, even
without mentioning God directly.
And while the Bible is not a comprehensive handbook for
running a business, doing plumbing, or serving patients, it
does speak to an enormous range of cultural, political,
economic, and ethical issues that are very much part of how we
all live. Also, the Christian worldview has made foundational
contributions to our own culture that may not be readily
apparent. The deep background for our work, especially in the
West—the rise of modern technology, the democratic ethos
that makes modern capitalismthrive, the idea of inherent
human freedomas the basis for economic freedomand the
development of markets—is due largely to the cultural changes
that Christianity has brought. Historian John Sommerville
argues that Western society’s most pervasive ideas, such as
the idea that forgiveness and service are more important than
saving face and revenge, have deeply biblical roots.166 Many
have argued, and I would agree, that the very rise of modern
science could have occurred only in a society in which the
biblical view of a sole, all-powerful, and personal Creator was
prevalent.167 So we all owe more than we may realize to the
unique contours and power of the Christian worldview.
Are you thinking about your work through the lenses of a
Christian worldview? Are you asking questions such as:
• What’s the story line of the culture in which I live and the
field where I work? Who are the protagonists and
antagonists?
• What are the underlying assumptions about meaning,
morality, origin, and destiny?
• What are the idols? The hopes? The fears?
• How does my particular profession retell this story line,
and what part does the profession itself play in the
story?
• What parts of the dominant worldviews are basically in
line with the gospel, so that I can agree with and align
with them?
• What parts of the dominant worldviews are irresolvable
without Christ? Where, in other words, must I challenge
my culture? How can Christ complete the story in a
different way?
• How do these stories affect both the formand the content
of my work personally? How can I work not just with
excellence but also with Christian distinctiveness in my
work?
• What opportunities are there in my profession for (a)
serving individual people, (b) serving society at large, (c)
serving my field of work, (d) modeling competence and
excellence, and (e) witnessing to Christ?
Of all the ways that the Christian faith affects work, the
realmof worldview is the most searching and yet also the
hardest to put into practice. All Christians live in cultures and
work in vocational fields that operate by powerful master
narratives that are sharply different fromthe gospel’s account
of things. But these narratives work at such a deep level that
their effects on us are hard to discern. An American who first
moves to a foreign country is shocked to discover how many
of her intuitions and practices that she considered common
sense and universal are actually particularly American ones—
and are ridiculous to many other people. By living in another
culture she gets a new vantage point fromwhich she can be
critical of herself, and as a result she willslowly change,
dropping some attitudes and adopting others.
Becoming a Christian is a lot like moving to a new country;
only it is more profound, because it gives us a new perspective
on every culture, every worldview, and every field of work. In
the long run, the gospel helps us see everything in a new light,
but it takes time to grasp and incorporate this new information
into how we live and pursue our vocations. And we can be
sure that this ultimate learning experience will never truly end;
we are told the angels themselves never tire of looking into the
gospel to see new wonders (1 Peter 1:10–12).
TEN
A New Conception of Work
Whatever you do, do well.
Ecclesiastes 9:10 (NLT)
Everyone Participates in God’s Work
The Jewish community has contributed hugely to the
flourishing of New York City. They have led in the
advancement of hospitals and medicine, arts and cultural
centers, and strong communities that sustain the elderly and
nurture the young. Their Scriptural heritage and beliefs give
thema strong commitment to “act justly and to love mercy and
to walk humbly with your God” (Micah 6:8). They are not
Christ followers, but God no doubt continues to work through
them. Another group often noted for their commitment to
moving to neighborhoods that have fallen into disrepair and
rehabilitating themis the gay community. They have worked
hard to improve many of the worst parts of our cities over the
last several decades. And, of course, we all know someone in
our field who is not a Christian who seems to hold the best
values and produce the most elegant product, beautiful dance
piece, or trusted and well-organized work team. If the Christian
worldview is so unique, how do we account for this?
In the last chapter we showed that the gospel provides a
worldview, or story, that provides Christian believers with real
guidance for their labor, giving thema deep and layered vision
of human flourishing that often enables themto work in ways
distinct fromthose around them. But this is not the entire
biblical picture. If it were, we might think that non-Christians
cannot do good work or good deeds, or that everything a
Christian does at their job must be completely and obviously
different fromeverything that a nonbeliever does. That is not
the case.
God is Creator of the world, and our work mirrors his
creative work when we create culture that conforms to his will
and vision for human beings—when it matches up with the
biblicalstory line. Yet theologians speak not only of God’s
creation but also of his providence. God does not simply
create; he also loves, cares for, and nurtures his creation. He
feeds and protects all he has made. But how does his
providential care reach us? As we have seen in earlier chapters,
especially in the teaching of Martin Luther, God’s loving care
comes to us largely through the labor of others. Work is a
major instrument of God’s providence; it is how he sustains the
human world.
As an extension of God’s creative work, the Christian’s
labor has its orientation toward God himself, and we must ask
how it can be done distinctively and for his glory. As an
extension of God’s providential work, our labor has its
orientation toward our neighbor, and we must ask how it can
be done excellently and for his or her good. This latter
motivation is available to everyone. So a farmer or chef meets
her neighbor’s need for food; a mechanic meets his neighbor’s
need for technical help on a car. This aspect of work-asprovision is the reason that much work that Christians do is
not done, at least not in its visible form, any differently from
the way non-Christians do it. It is not so easy, for example, to
identify the uniquely Christian way to fill a cavity. And
because all human beings are made in the image of God
(Genesis 1:26–28) and all are given their talents and skills for
work in the world by God (1 Corinthians 7:17), we should not
be surprised that many people without belief in Jesus can do
great work—even better work—than Christians.
In fact, an unbalanced emphasis on worldview has certain
dangers. For example, it can lead us to privilege white-collar
work over blue-collar work. Writers and managers have the
opportunity to think out the influence of Christian beliefs in
their work. But how relevant is this to the assembly-line worker
or the craftsman or technician, whose worldview may not make
an obvious difference to their daily tasks? Of course, all
Christians work with radically different inner motives than
those who don’t believe, and this can certainly make a
difference in the quality, spirit, and honesty with which a
believer labors. But that does not mean a Christian will build an
airplane engine differently froma non-Christian. And so to
think of work only in worldview terms, and not in terms of
God’s providence and love, can subtly imply that the Bible’s
view of work is less relevant to those of the working classes.
The more serious danger associated with an under-
emphasis on work as the vehicle of God’s providence is that it
leads Christians to undervalue the good work done by
nonbelievers.168 The fullness and balance of the biblical
teaching prevents us fromvaluing only Christian work or only
professional work. Instead Christians should place a high value
on all human work (especially excellent work), done by all
people, as a channel of God’s love for his world. They will be
able to appreciate and rejoice in their own work, whether it is
prestigious or not, as well as in the skillful work of all other
people, whether they believe or not.
So this biblical conception of work—as a vehicle for God’s
loving provision for the world—is essential. It counteracts the
elitismand sectarianismthat can creep into our approach to
work when we grasp the distinctiveness of the Christian
worldview.
The Balance of Common Grace
When we learn to value all people’s work and all kinds of work,
we are moving into a realmof Christian theology called
“common grace,” and at this point it would be good to deepen
our understanding of this idea. What can Christians assume
they have in common with people who apparently have not
experienced saving grace, who are not followers of Jesus?
Does God work in the broader reaches of cultural interaction to
bestow certain blessings on all people—blessings that provide
the basis for Christians to cooperate with, and learn from, nonChristians?
169
The Bible’s answer is “yes.” Psalm19 differentiates
between a kind of “wordless speech,” which tells all people
something about God’s presence and glory, and the revelation
that comes to believers through the Bible and the convicting
work of the Holy Spirit. Romans 1 and 2 confirmthat all of us
share a primordial knowledge of God: In Romans 2, verses 14–
15, Paulsays that God’s law is written on the heart of every
human being. People have innate consciences that are
preloaded with senses of honesty, justice, love, the Golden
Rule, and so on.170 People know at some deep level that there
is a God, that we are his creatures, that we should serve him,
and that he makes demands on us for relationships with him
and other people. God further reveals himself to all people
through the magnificence of nature—but also through human
culture, which is essentially the forming and filling of nature as
God created it. Consider Isaiah 28, verses 24–29: “When a
farmer plows for planting . . . when he has leveled the surface . .
. does he not plant wheat in its place, barley in its plot, and
spelt in its field? His God instructs himand teaches himthe
right way. . . . Grain must be ground to make bread . . . all this
also comes fromthe Lord Almighty, wonderful in counsel and
magnificent in wisdom.”
This is remarkable. Isaiah tells us that anyone who becomes
a skillful farmer, or who brings advancements in agriculture, is
being taught by God. One commentator writes of this text,
“What appears as a discovery (the proper season and
conditions for sowing, farmmanagement, rotation of crops,
etc.) is actually the Creator opening his book of creation and
revealing his truth.”
171
Remember that farming is an analogue to all culture making.
So every advancement in learning, every work of art, every
innovation in health care or technology or management or
governance, is simply God “opening his book of creation and
revealing his truth” to us. Of course, the vast majority of
farmers in the history of the world did not know that God was
doing this, but Isaiah says that was what was happening. This
is what theologians call “general revelation,” an aspect of
common grace in which God reveals himself to all people. See
how other texts fromthe Bible sound a similar note:
•James 1, verse 17 says that “every good and perfect gift is
fromabove . . . fromthe Father of the heavenly lights.”
This means that every act of goodness, wisdom, justice,
and beauty—no matter who does it—is being enabled by
God. It is a gift, and therefore a formof grace.
• In Exodus 31, verses 1–4, we read how Bezalel was “filled .
. . with the Spirit of God, with skill, ability, and knowledge
in all kinds of crafts—to make artistic designs.” Here we
see artistic skill coming fromGod. Salieri was right—
Mozart’s music was the voice of God, regardless of the
moral and spiritual condition of Mozart’s heart.
• In Isaiah 45, verse 1, we read of Cyrus, a pagan king whom
God anoints with his Spirit and chooses for world
leadership. In Genesis 20, verses 6–7 we read how God
prevents another pagan king fromfalling into sin. These
are indications of how God’s Spirit functions both as a
nonsaving ennobling force in the world and as a
nonsaving restraining force in the world. This is not the
Spirit working as a converting or a sanctifying agent.
Rather he acts to give wisdom, courage, and insight and
to restrain the effects of sin—even to those who would
deny God’s existence.
So through his common grace God blesses all people, so
that Christians can benefit from, and cooperate with, nonChristians. However, there are limitations to common grace,
which require us to respond to these blessings with balance. In
Romans 1, verse 18 Paulsays that we “hold the truth in
unrighteousness” (KJV). This statement has two edges to it,
and John Calvin expresses both well. First he writes about
secular authors (he was thinking mainly of the ancient pagan
Greek and Roman thinkers):
Let that admirable light of truth shining in themteach
us that the mind of man, though fallen and perverted
fromits wholeness, is nevertheless clothed and
ornamented with God’s excellent gifts. If we regard
the Spirit of God as the sole fountain of truth, we
shall neither reject the truth itself, nor despise it
where it shall appear unless we wish to dishonor the
Spirit of God. . . . Those men whomScripture (1
Corinthians 2:14) calls “natural men” were, indeed,
sharp and penetrating in their investigation of inferior
things. Let us, accordingly, learn by their example
how many gifts the Lord left to human nature even
after it was despoiled of its true good.172
Here Calvin is appreciating the way God blesses all those
who are made in his image. Yet just prior to this, Calvin also
writes that while “in man’s perverted and degenerate nature
some sparks still gleam, [the light is nonetheless] choked with
dense ignorance, so that it cannot come forth effectively. [His]
mind, because of its dullness . . . betrays how incapable it is of
seeking and finding truth.”
173
How could someone write these two seemingly
contradictory things within just a few pages of each other? Are
nonbelievers capable of discerning the truth or not? Yes and
no. Calvin is reading Romans 1 carefully!
First, we must acknowledge that there is no neutrality in the
world. Everyone who does not acknowledge Christ as Lord is
operating out of a false view of ultimate reality, while to
confess Christ as Lord is to be in line with ultimate reality.
Everyone is operating froma worldview that either denies
Christ or him. No one is objective or neutral; no one can avoid
the question.
At the same time, the doctrine of common grace means that
despite all false worldviews, everyone grasps and to some
degree acknowledges aspects of the biblical worldview: truths
about God, creation, human nature, and our need for rescue.
Deep in our hearts’ operating systems, God has imprinted his
story. This universal knowledge of God and of good—this
aspect of natural revelation—has been called “first-order
beliefs.” All people hold these beliefs at some level, even if
their conscious, intellectual, culturally conditioned “secondorder beliefs” deny themutterly. Paulsays we “hold the truth
in unrighteousness”—which means that we all have the truth
in some way. How else could we hold it?
This odd tension means that the best of what nonChristians say and do will be based on truths that they “know”
at one level and yet do not know at another. For example,
Leonard Bernstein’s second-order beliefs were secular and
naturalistic. But on a TVbroadcast he famously said,
“Listening to Beethoven’s Fifth, you get the feeling there’s
something right with the world, something that checks
throughout, something that follows its own laws consistently,
something we can trust, that will never let us down.”
174 He was
saying that music gave himnot simply emotion, but meaning.
Despite the fact that his formal beliefs were that life was a
cosmic accident, and therefore there could be no meaning to
anything, music made himfeel that there was meaning to it all,
that it did matter how he lived! His first-order beliefs were
bubbling up despite his second-order beliefs, as they do for
everyone.
The Freedom of Common Grace
Without an understanding of common grace, the world can be
a pretty confusing place for a Christian. It would be natural for
many Christians to identify with Antonio Salieri: He is
bewildered and bitter that as a morally good person, his talent
is modest, while Mozart (a morally despicable person, at least
in Peter Shaffer’s play Amadeus) has been favored by God
through the gift of his soaring talent. Beyond his blindness to
his own sin, Salieri’s problemwas a failure to understand the
reality of common grace. God gives out gifts of wisdom, talent,
beauty, and skill according to his grace—that is, in a
completely unmerited way. He casts themacross the human
race like seed, in order to enrich, brighten, and preserve the
world. By rights, sin should be making life on earth here much
more unbearable than it is—and in fact, all of creation and
culture should have fallen apart by now. The reason it is not
worse is because of the gift of common grace.
Without an understanding of common grace, Christians will
believe they can live self-sufficiently within their own cultural
enclave. Some might feel that we should go only to Christian
doctors, work only with Christian lawyers, listen only to
Christian counselors, or enjoy only Christian artists. Of course,
all nonbelievers have seriously impaired spiritual vision. Yet so
many of the gifts God has put in the world are given to
nonbelievers. Mozart was a gift to us—whether he was a
believer or not. So Christians are free to study the world of
human culture in order to know more of God; for as creatures
made in His image we can appreciate truth and wisdom
wherever we find it.
Without an understanding of common grace, Christians will
have trouble understanding why non-Christians so often
exceed Christians morally and in wisdom. Properly understood,
the doctrine of sin means that believers are never as good as
our true worldview should make us. Similarly, the doctrine of
grace means that unbelievers are never as messed up as their
false worldview should make them. For in the Christian story,
the antagonist is not non-Christians but the reality of sin,
which (as the gospel tells us) lies within us as well as within
them.
And so we are likely to be on firmfooting if we make
common ground with non-Christians to do work that serves the
world. Christians’ work with others should be marked by both
humble cooperation and respectful provocation. An
understanding of common grace, as well as an experience of
God’s pardoning grace in Christ, should lead us to freely and
humbly work with others who may not share our faith but can
be used greatly by God to accomplish enormous good. At the
same time, an understanding of the gospel worldview means
we should at times respectfully pursue a different path or
winsomely point out how our own Christian faith gives us
powerful resources and guidance for what we are doing.175
The Dialogue of Popular Culture
In general, Christians’ reaction to popular culture in the last
eighty years has been some formof disengagement.176 Music,
movies, and television have been sweepingly evaluated as
dangerous, polluting, or degrading. The withdrawal has taken
different forms. One formis complete renunciation. Another
formis the creation of an alternate Christian subculture littered
with sanitized, overtly evangelistic forms of music, movies, TV
shows, literature, vacation destinations, and so on. A third
formof disengagement is uncritical consumption of popular
culture without worldview discernment.177 Why this
disengagement with our culture?
One reason is a “thin” or legalistic view of sin, where sin is
seen as a series of discrete acts of noncompliance with God’s
regulations. You pursue Christian growth largely by seeking
environments where you are less likely to do these sinful
actions or to encounter others who have done them. Sin can
essentially be removed fromyour life through separation and
discipline. This view of sin comports with a lack of
understanding of the thoroughness and richness of Christ’s
gracious work for us. For without an understanding of grace
we will believe we must (and can) earn our salvation. But to
accomplish that we will need a view of sin that is easier to
conquer through conscious effort.
If we have a thin view of sin, we will feelsafe if we remove
fromour view anything that could tempt us to commit actions
of overt sexual immorality, profanity, dishonesty, or violence.
By withdrawing such cultural “texts” fromour presence, we
may feel less sinful; but we may be fooling ourselves. The
complex, organic nature of our sin willstill be at work making
idols out of good things in our lives—such as our moral
goodness, financialsecurity, family, doctrinal purity, or pride in
our culture. Of course, there is a great deal that is pernicious in
popular culture, with its oft-noted glorification of sexand
violence. The Bible tells us to flee sexual temptation (1
Corinthians 6:18–20); and a wise person willset wise
boundaries.178 But too much emphasis on wholesale
withdrawal fromculture increases the likelihood of slipping into
other more “respectable” idolatries. A theologically “thick”
view of sin, by contrast, sees it as a compulsive drive of the
heart to produce idols. This view should lead neither to
withdrawal nor to uncritical consumption, but rather to humble,
critical engagement with culture.178
Another cause of disengagement is a thin, or
intellectualistic, view of common grace. As we noted earlier, all
people possess—and suppress—some knowledge of God and
his character. But many conceive of this knowledge mainly (or
strictly) as cognitive information that can be retrieved and
transmitted as we provide evidence of the existence of God, the
truth of Christianity, and so on. In other words, we tend to
think of this innate knowledge of God in intellectual terms.
But the language of Romans 1, verses 18–25 gives us a
much more comprehensive and dynamic picture of how general
revelation or common grace works in real life. The truth is being
suppressed (verse 18), but it continues to bear down on us.
Verse 20 says, “Since the creation of the world God’s invisible
qualities . . . have been clearly seen, being understood from
what has been made, so men are without excuse.” But the
verbs nosumena (“are being understood”) and kathopatai
(“are being seen”) are in the formof present passive
participles. That is, the reality of God’s nature and our
obligations to himare continuously presented to us. These
realities are not static, propositional information, but rather a
continually fresh, insistent pressure on the consciousness of
every individual. If this is true, then every artifact of human
culture is a positive response to God’s general revelation and
simultaneously a rebellious assertion against his sovereign
rule over us (Romans 1:21).
So we can see all cultural production (and remember,
everything we do at work is some formof cultural production)
as a dialogue between our innate, affirming response to God’s
common grace and the idolatrous, rebellious nature of our
hearts. Therefore, human culture is an extremely complex
mixture of brilliant truth, marred half-truths, and overt
resistance to the truth. “Loss of faith in a given religion does
not by any means imply the eradication of the religious
instinct. It merely means that the instinct, temporarily
repressed, willseek an object elsewhere.”
179
Here is an interesting example of this dialogue:
One of the movies we have shown students is the
Vietnamese/American co-production Three Seasons,
a collection of four intertwining vignettes. One story
has to do with a cyclo (sort of a cross between a
bicycle and a rickshaw) driver named Hai and his
infatuation with an ambitious prostitute, a young
woman who is sure she can sleep her way out of
poverty into the cool, clean world of the luxury hotels
near where she works. After winning some money in
a cyclo race, he pays $50 to spend the night with her.
He rents a roomin the luxury hotel and the scene
leads you to expect a typical, erotic love scene.
Against the viewer expectations, though, he does not
have sexwith her. Instead he simply requests to
watch her fall asleep, to watch her rest in the world
she dreams of joining. Slowly, comfortably, she falls
asleep. And he is gone in the morning, having
demanded nothing fromher except the chance to
fulfill her desire to belong. Something snaps in the
prostitute, and she finds she cannot return to her old
job. [There is some similarity here to how the grace of
the bishop transforms Valjean into an honest man in
Les Misérables.] It is a powerfulscene, a completely
unexpected glimpse of fragile beauty and selfless,
life-changing love. To my knowledge,
director/screenwriter Tony Bui is not a Christian, and
perhaps has never even heard the gospel. . . . But
moments of beauty and truth [and incredibly
poignant images of Christ’s saving work] are
evidence of the work of God who preserves the
noble, creative image of himself in us despite the
distorting effects of sin.180
Dualism vs. Integration
Christians’ disengagement frompopular culture usually carries
over into dualismat work. “Dualism” is a termused to describe
a separating wall between the sacred and the secular. It is a
direct result of a thin view of sin, common grace, and God’s
providential purposes.
Dualismleads some to think that if their work is to please
Christ, it must be done overtly in his name. They feel they have
to write and performart that explicitly mentions Jesus, or teach
religious subjects in a Christian school; or that they must work
in an organization in which all people are professing Christians.
Or they must let everyone know that they lead Bible studies in
the office in the morning before work hours. (Remember how
Luther railed against the separation of all work into the
“spiritual estate” and the “temporal estate.”) This kind of
dualismcomes both froma failure to see the panoramic scope
of common grace and the subtle depths of human sin. People
with this view cannot see that work done by non-Christians
always contains some degree of God’s common grace as well
as the distortions of sin. And they cannot see that work done
by Christians, even if it overtly names the name of Jesus, is
also significantly distorted by sin.
The opposite dualistic approach, however, is even more
prevalent—and based on our experience, even more difficult to
dismantle. In this approach, Christians think of themselves as
Christians only within church activity. Their Christian life is
what they do on Sundays and weeknights, when they engage
in spiritual activities. The rest of the week they have no ability
to think circumspectly about the underlying values they are
consuming and living out. In their life and work “out in the
world,” they uncritically accept and reenact all of their culture’s
underlying values and idolatries of self, surface appearances,
technique, personal freedom, materialism, and other features of
expressive individualism. While the first formof dualismfails to
grasp the importance of what we have in common with the
world, this formfails to grasp the importance of what is
distinctive about the Christian worldview—namely, that the
gospel reframes all things, not just religious things.
The integration of faith and work is the opposite of dualism.
We should be willing to be very engaged with the cultural and
vocational worlds of non-Christians. Our thick view of sin will
remind us that even explicitly Christian work and culture will
always have some idolatrous discourse within it. Our thick
view of common grace will remind us that even explicitly nonChristian work and culture will always have some witness to
God’s truth in it. Because Christians are never as good as their
right beliefs should make themand non-Christians are never as
bad as their wrong beliefs should make them, we will adopt a
stance of critical enjoyment of human culture and its
expressions in every field of work. We will learn to recognize
the half-truths and resist the idols; and we will learn to
recognize and celebrate the glimpses of justice, wisdom, truth,
and beauty we find around us in all aspects of life. Ultimately, a
grasp of the gospel and of biblical teaching on cultural
engagement should lead Christians to be the most appreciative
of the hands of God behind the work of our colleagues and
neighbors.
ELEVEN
A New Compass for Work
On the day of your fasting, you do as you please and
exploit all your workers. . . . Is not this the kind of
fasting I have chosen: to loose the chains of injustice
and untie the cords of the yoke, to set the oppressed
free and break every yoke? Is it not to share your
food with the hungry and to provide the poor
wanderer with shelter—when you see the naked, to
clothe him?
Isaiah 58:3, 6–7
The Limitations of Ethics
Not long after the financial meltdown in 2008 and 2009, a writer
in The New York Times Sunday Opinion section wrote about a
friend of hers who had worked at an investment bank before
she was laid off. She was known to be hardworking, fair, and
honest, and she had been generous with her money toward
friends and charitable nonprofits. However, her specialty had
been securitizing subprime mortgages, student loans, and
credit card debt. “That all this debt she was putting together
like a puzzle and selling to investors would play such a sinister
role in the downfall of the economy didn’t occur to her—
although it probably should have.”
181 Why didn’t it occur to
her? So many on Wall Street are asking themselves and one
another that question. The reason is that our modern and
postmodern idols work against our inclination to ask such
questions. They tell us that if the practice is legal and if
everyone is doing it, the only fundamental question is: Can
money be made?
Some scoff at the idea that the financialservices industry
and business at large need more external constraints to be
ethical. In one article responding to widespread calls for higher
ethics among business leaders, The Economist cited Milton
Friedman’s famous dictumthat business managers have one
and only one goal: to maximize shareholder value.182 The writer
argued that the market itself rewards integrity and punishes
dishonesty. No one has to stand over managers and business
owners; if they are dishonest it will catch up to themand ruin
the bottomline. Pay attention to the bottomline, and the rest
will take care of itself.
Indeed, many business ethics courses and books subtly
argue in the same way. Yes, they say, business owners and
employees should be honest and fair. Yes, we should treat
employees with generosity, and we should give back to the
community. But why? What is the basis for such an appeal?
The most common answer is: It’s good for business. It
enhances your reputation, and in the long termit creates a
more favorable business environment. In other words, most
people argue—or at the very least, live out—ethics on the
basis of cost-benefit analysis. Integrity is profitable;
dishonesty isn’t. And most of the time, at least in the long run,
this is true.
But is that enough? Won’t there be at least some situations
in which the short-termgains for an ethically questionable act
will be so great, and the danger to you or your friends so small,
that on the basis of cost-benefit analysis the potential gains
vastly outweigh the risk? Of course. And there will even be
situations in any field in which doing the purely ethical thing
could be financially ruinous, and, therefore, according to strict
cost-benefit analysis, the risk of getting caught in an ethical
violation, or fracturing a relationship, is clearly worth taking. So
at least part of the time, it is bad business to be honest.
Let’s apply this to a more personal and seemingly small
situation to which many people can relate. At twenty-seven
years old, Howard was given an opportunity to move fromone
large company to another for a modest increase in
responsibility, but greater future opportunity. At the point of
salary negotiations, Howard was asked to share his current
salary with his prospective employer. Howard pumped up the
figure by a mere 4 percent, a few thousand dollars. Of course
his thinking was that the higher they thought his salary was
currently, the more they’d offer him. He justified the lie because
the prospective company offered two weeks less vacation a
year than his current one. He just added the value of that
benefit onto his salary figure. On the very slimchance that
he’d get caught, he had a plausible excuse. The benefit
outweighed the cost and risk. And by the way, he was pretty
sure everyone did this sort of thing. So was there anything
wrong with it?
Our individual professional ethics have a cumulative effect,
for good or ill, on the broader common good. In a short but
compelling booklet, former vice president of the European
Parliament Sir Fred Catherwood contends that corruption is
one of the greatest challenges to economic development and
politicalstability in the world.183 As a young man in an
international construction business, he discovered that bribery
was routine in the parts of the world in which there was little
politicalstability and terrible extremes of wealth and poverty,
but where it was less prevalent both the economy and civil
society were stronger. In response to this pattern,
representatives of many international companies, development
institutions, public officials, and other NGOs created an
anticorruption movement called Transparency International.184
Catherwood tells a story to illustrate that personal honesty
has a wider social impact, and also that practicing honesty
takes not just an individual but the support of the entire
community. He relates the experience of a brilliant young
Christian doctor froma country where, by law, hospital care
was supposed to be free to all citizens. The reality was that
both nurses and doctors were routinely bribed in order to
secure care, and therefore only the wealthy got treatment.
Many died because they could not pay. This evil was
systemic, because the government could not supply the kind
of financialsupport necessary to provide the hospital care it
promised, in large part due to corruption and payoffs in other
parts of the politicalstructure. The young man refused, for the
sake of conscience, to take the bribes, and so he essentially
could not participate in the health care programof his society.
When he looked to his church for support, he was
disappointed. The rapidly growing national church was still
young and not yet socially secure. They were afraid to oppose
the powerful government interests. In frustration he finally
emigrated, leaving behind the country that so greatly needed
both his skills and his commitment to justice.185
Paul Batchelor of Transparency International warns that
most people believe corruption to be a problemonly in
“backward” parts of the world. That is a gross
oversimplification, as he writes in an essay called “Salt and
Light: Christians’ Role in Combating Corruption.”
186 The
greater the corruption, the greater the economic weakness. But
even in the more prosperous parts of the world corruption saps
economies that could be even stronger and robs many people —usually the poor—of the benefits of living in those societies.
Batchelor points to our growing awareness that in the financial
world there is often “distortion of investment and incentives,”
such that investors and shareholders can no longer trust the
numbers that companies and financial institutions give them,
and this lack of trust undermines investment and growth. The
week I amwriting this, Barclays Bank has been fined more than
450 million dollars for manipulating the prices of financial
products to their own benefit (in this case by rigging the Libor,
or London Interbank Offered Rate) and to the detriment of
small businesses and investors.187
Batchelor points out that corruption does not mark only the
business world. He lists revelations of corruption, outright
bribery, and gross self-interest by elected and government
officials. This leads to increasing cynicismon the part of the
citizenry, and less participation in the political process, which
then enables corruption to thrive all the more. Hugh Heclo,
professor of government at Harvard and George Mason, wrote
a book called On Thinking Institutionally that traces the
history of the steady loss of confidence that Americans have
experienced toward all of their institutions—government,
business, religious—and the consequent dire effects on
society.188 So personal dishonesty in the workplace—when it
breeds—can have far wider effects on society.
So what about Howard? How could his small lie possibly
have wider effects on society? As Howard tells the story now,
he shares that a real breakthrough in his thinking happened
when he realized that the desire for just a little more money
would so easily cause himto forsake his integrity. Why
couldn’t he just have been honest and shared that he thought
the two weeks’ vacation he’d be sacrificing was worth an
additional few thousand dollars? Why couldn’t he just trust
that God, who was providing the interview in the first place,
would provide for the salary? And was he basing his interest in
the job on the salary or on the work God was giving himto do?
He realized that the wider impact on society started with the
recognition that, with integrity sacrificed on the altar of money,
the next lie would be easier. He realized that others who might
observe himcould be tempted to do the same. Everyone would
trust one another a little less. And he realized that to work for
the money instead of the value that the work itself might
contribute would damage the culture of the company he was
joining.
Christians can take a stand against unethical behavior,
even if it means great sacrifice on their part. Fortunately, the
story line of the Christian faith gives believers an ethical
bedrock—a much firmer foundation for acting with integrity
than offered by the pragmatic approach of a cost-benefit
analysis. We are to be honest, compassionate, and generous
not because these things are rewarding (which they usually
are, hence the cost-benefit approach to ethics), but because
they are right in and of themselves—because to do so honors
the will of God and his design for human life. Sometimes, of
course, that will put us in the minority and even at a
disadvantage. But indeed, as Bible scholar Bruce Waltke
points out, the Bible says that the very definition of righteous
people is that they disadvantage themselves to advantage
others, while “the wicked . . . are willing to disadvantage the
community to advantage themselves.”
189
A Different Set of Virtues
In Chapter 10 we argued that the biblical concept of common
grace emphasizes the commonalities between Christians and
our work colleagues who do not subscribe to our beliefs. So
Christians and non-Christians can share the same education
and expertise, can appreciate together advances in the field and
admire the most skilled practitioners, whatever their faith. It is
important to be as skillful, diligent, savvy, and disciplined as
we can possibly be. In Colossians 3, verse 23 we are told
“whatever you do, work at it with all your heart, as working for
the Lord.” Those who take this biblical directive seriously will
seek the respect of their colleagues for the quality and integrity
of their work. This means having a track record of saying what
we mean and doing what we say, following through on
commitments every time, whether formal or informal, and being
transparent and fair-minded.
Many argue that being a person of integrity and dedication
is simply common sense, that it does not require Christian faith.
At one level this is true. The well-known appendixto C.S.
Lewis’s The Abolition of Man demonstrates how similar
various cultures and religions are in their understanding of the
virtuous human life.190 Nonetheless, Christians are equipped
with an ethical compass and power of the gospel that can set
us apart—sometimes sharply, sometimes subtly—fromthose
around us. This is because biblical Christian faith gives us
significant resources not present in other worldviews, which, if
lived out, will differentiate believers in the workplace.
Thomas Aquinas, the greatest Christian theologian of the
medieval era, looked at the four cardinal virtues of Plato—
justice, courage, temperance, and prudence—and agreed that
these were also taught in the Christian Scriptures.191 Then
Aquinas added three theological virtues—faith, hope, and love —to the four cardinal virtues, because these are specifically
and uniquely born out of the Christian revelation about the
character of God and his grace. While ancient cultures certainly
valued compassion within limits, Christian teaching raised the
definition of the idea of love to a new level, to include loving
one’s enemies and forgiving persecutors. This was seen as
outrageous by those in shame and honor cultures, where
vengefulness was seen as a virtue.
French philosopher Luc Ferry in his history of philosophy
argues that Christianity got “the upper hand over Greek
thought and dominated Europe” especially because of what it
taught “in the realmof ethics.” Specifically, Greek thought had
always seen ultimate reality as fundamentally impersonal, but
“the harmonious and divine structure of the cosmos . . . came to
be identified for Christians with a single and unique
personality, that of Christ.”
192 Before Christianity, both
Western and Eastern cultures conceived of salvation as
entrance into an impersonal and anonymous state. There was
no concept that we came fromdivine love and could return to
experience it. But Christianity understood ultimate reality to be
rooted in a personal God who created out of love. This caused
“the transition froman anonymous and blind doctrine of
salvation to one that promises not only that we shall be saved
by one person, Christ, but that we shall be saved as individuals
in our own right.”
193
Christians understood that we were made by and for eternal
love, which was the primary meaning of life. Even the Christian
doctrine of God as triune, consisting of three persons who
have known and loved one another fromall eternity,
demonstrates that relationships of love are the building blocks
of all reality. And the ultimate purpose of God’s work of
creation was to create a world of persons with whomhe could
enjoy a relationship. God created people, not to receive love
and honor fromthembut to share the love, joy, honor, and
glory he already had within the Trinity.194
Love, then, occupies a supreme place in the Christian
imagination. As Jesus says, to be fully human boils down to
loving God and loving our neighbor. Everything else—our
accomplishments, our causes, our identity, and our feelings—
is a distant second. Of course this understanding of the nature
of reality will have an extensive impact on how we do our work.
For instance, are relationships a means to the end of accruing
power, wealth, and comfort? Or is wealth creation a means to
serve the end goal of loving others? One way goes against the
grain of the universe made by a triune God, and therefore it
cannot honor himor lead to human flourishing. The other is the
paradigmof Christian work.
Think of the cliché that nobody ever gets to the end of their
life and wishes they had spent more time at the office. It makes
good sense, of course, up to a point. But here’s a more
interesting perspective: At the end of your life, will you wish
that you had plunged more of your time, passion, and skills
into work environments and work products that helped people
to give and receive more love? Can you see a way to answer
“yes” to this question fromyour current career trajectory?
A Different View of Humanity
Together with the supremacy of love, Christian faith gives us
another resource for ethical behavior—a specific basis for
honoring human rights. If every person is made in the image of
God he or she has inviolable rights, regardless of that person’s
race, class, gender, lifestyle, or moral character. Ferry says that
among the Greeks and Romans, the worth of a person rested in
his inherited gifts and abilities, not simply in being human.195
This is the reason Aristotle could write that some people are
naturally born to be slaves, because they were not as capable
of advanced rational thought. He said, “Nature would like to
distinguish between the bodies of freemen and slaves, making
the one strong for servile labor, the other upright, and although
useless for such services, useful for political life in the arts
both of war and peace. . . . It is clear, then, that some men are
by nature free, and others slaves, and that for these latter
slavery is both expedient and right.”
196
By stark contrast, John Calvin, one of the Protestant
Reformers, wrote:
The great part of [men] are most unworthy if they be
judged by their own merit. But here Scripture helps in
the best way when it teaches that we are not to
consider that men merit of themselves but to look
upon the image of God in all men, to which we owe all
honor and love. . . . You willsay, “He has deserved
something far different of me.” Yet what has the Lord
deserved? . . . Remember not to consider men’s evil
intention but . . . look upon the image of God in them,
which . . . with its beauty and dignity allures us to
love and embrace them.197
By resting its case upon a unique definition of the human
person (as image-bearer of God) and an unprecedented idea of
love (as the origin, purpose, and destiny of the world),
Christianity was to have an incalculable effect upon the history
of ideas and the development of culture. If not for the Christian
view of the individual, for example, the philosophy of human
rights to which we subscribe today would never have emerged.
Christianity held that all human beings are made in the image
of God and therefore have an inviolable right to be treated with
honor and love, regardless of whether they culturally, morally,
and personally appeal to or offend us. The sweeping nature of
this ethical principle is startling, and nothing of its kind was
produced in pre-Christian cultures. As Ferry notes and others
have argued extensively, this understanding of human rights
grew out of the soil of the Christian belief in the image of
God.198
How should this belief be manifest in the way Christians do
their work? Katherine has shared that when she first made the
switch frombusiness to working in the church, she was talking
to a pastor colleague about some of her “contacts” in town.
The pastor turned to her and gently said, “Katherine, you work
in ministry now. In ministry we call them‘people.’” The
pressures and practices of the marketplace increasingly cause
us to rationalize every aspect of life by analyzing efficiencies.
People become contacts who can help you; customers are
eyeballs and wallets; employees are resources to execute a
task. It’s so easy to measure the worth of customers,
employees, and even congregants in financial terms. Froma
strictly economic perspective, shareholders, management,
employees, suppliers, customers, and community residents
have unequal financial value, and it is difficult not to treat them
unequally in some respects. But while economically speaking
some are more valuable than others, theologically speaking all
of us are made in the image of God and are therefore equal in
importance.
Consider the case of an unavoidable layoff. Of course, at
various times in any community’s life some stakeholders need
to sacrifice for the long-termgood of the whole. Nevertheless it
is possible to handle these situations with love. Managers
leading in a layoff situation can minimize their own time,
discomfort, and effort by issuing terse bulletins and shutting
off any ability to question or express concerns. But treating
people as human beings with dignity rather than
interchangeable resources means being transparent with
information, offering extensive two-way communication, and
seeking genuinely to persuade rather than merely to control
people’s responses. Treating people with dignity in the midst
of the reality of downsizing and layoffs requires a strong moral
compass. But belief in the image of God can bring a new
dimension to the conduct of organizational life.
As Ferry and others observe, the concept of human rights,
born out of the theological virtue of love, has been
appropriated and deployed widely today by many people who
do not believe in Christianity or indeed in God at all. Millions of
irreligious people can and do believe passionately in human
rights. But some have also warned that in a thoroughly secular
society, without the belief in a loving, personal God fromwhich
the whole concept came, long-termcommitment to human
rights could wane. Christians must remain absolutely
committed to an understanding of human rights based on the
image of God.199
A Different Source of Guidance
Most people think of faith and spirituality as consisting of
doctrinal beliefs, moral behavior, and spiritual experience. So
when thinking of God giving us a “moral compass,” they
imagine a set of ethical rules and regulations, a kind of divine
instruction manual fromGod for life. And it is certainly true that
in the Bible Christians receive many practical ethical principles
for how to live and many boundary markers showing us what
behavior we must completely avoid. If that were all God
provided us, it would be helpful, but insufficient. Because there
is a whole category missing—wisdom.
According to the Bible, wisdomis more than just obeying
God’s ethical norms; it is knowing the right thing to do in the
80 percent of life’s situations in which the moral rules don’t
provide the clear answer. There is no biblical law that tells you
what job to take, whether to go back to school, whomto marry
and befriend, when to speak out or hold your peace, whether to
make the deal or walk away—yet the wrong decisions can blow
up your life.
How can we become wise so that we make good decisions?
The Bible teaches that wisdomaccumulates fromseveral
sources. First, we must not merely believe in God, but know
himpersonally. When God’s gracious love becomes not an
abstract doctrine but a living reality, it means our heart is less
controlled by anxiety and pride, two powerful forces that
constantly lead us to unwisely over-or under-react to
situations. Second, we must know ourselves. Many bad
decisions stemfroman inability to know what we are and are
not capable of accomplishing. The gospel keeps us fromoveror underestimating our own abilities, because it shows us both
our sin and God’s love for us in Christ. Third, we learn wisdom
through experience. The foolish heart—blinded fromreality
because of its idols—does not learn fromexperience. In fact,
the ups and downs of life can lead us to many false inferences.
The proud person blames all failures on others, while the selfhater takes full blame for themeven when others are
responsible. Without the knowledge of God and self that the
gospel brings, experience may teach us precious little; but if we
know God and self, then time deepens our understanding of
human nature, of the times we live in, of the power and use of
words, of how human relationships work. All this leads to
wisdomin decision-making.
In the Old Testament, the best place to understand wisdom
is the book of Proverbs. Proverbs is a rich resource for
handling anger, envy, pride, and discouragement; for resisting
the temptations of beauty, money, and power; for wrestling
with the problemof self-control; for making decisions; and for
keeping relationships in good repair. And what does the New
Testament teach? It assumes all the Old Testament teaches
about the nature of wisdom, but it gives Christians a new and
wonderful resource to do what Proverbs calls us to do. How
can we move frommerely knowing about God to knowing God?
How can we get deep insight into our own heart and the hearts
of others? The answer is through the Holy Spirit, given to us
by Christ when we embrace himin faith.
The New Testament calls the Holy Spirit the “spirit of
wisdom” (Ephesians 1:17) and “power” (1:19). Paul prays for
his friends that God would fill themwith “all the wisdomand
understanding that the Spirit gives” (Colossians 1:9). When he
speaks in the famous Ephesians 5 passage about being filled
with the Spirit he calls his readers to “be very careful . . . how
you live—not as unwise but as wise” (Ephesians 5:15–16).200
To be wise is to know how to best use every moment
strategically. And this insight comes fromthe influence of the
Holy Spirit, who also strengthens us to live a life worthy of the
Lord (Colossians 1:11) and is referred to as a “spirit of power,
of love, and of self-discipline” (2 Timothy 1:7).
But how does the Spirit come to give us wisdom? Are we to
sit in silence and wait to hear a voice? Not at all. In Acts 15 we
see the leaders of the early church embroiled in a controversy
over whether Gentile converts were required to keep the Jewish
dietary laws and other cultural customs. In effect, they were
wrestling with an issue of organizational policy. The text shows
us that they debated and discussed matters intensely until
they came up with a solution. Then they made a decision and
sent it out to the church with the fascinating words, “It seemed
good to the Holy Spirit and to us that . . .” (Acts 15:28). In
other words, they used their best thinking and reasoning, their
knowledge and their experience, and came up with a sound
decision that they attributed to the Holy Spirit.
Here then is how the Spirit makes us wise. On the night
before he died, Jesus told his disciples that he would send the
Holy Spirit and “when he, the Spirit of truth, comes . . . he will
glorify me . . .” (John 16:13–14). The Spirit does not make us
wise in some magical kind of way, giving us little nudges and
insider tips to help us always choose the best stock to invest
in. Rather, he makes Jesus Christ a living, bright reality,
transforming our character, giving us new inner poise, clarity,
humility, boldness, contentment, and courage. All of this leads
to increasing wisdomas the years go by, and to better and
better professional and personal decisions.
A Different Audience
In Ephesians 6, Paulsets forth a simple but profound principle
that both ennobles work (for those in danger of viewing it as
drudgery) and demythologizes work (for those in danger of
making it their identity). He says all work should be done “as if
you were serving the Lord”:
Slaves, obey your earthly masters with respect and
fear, and with sincerity of heart, just as you would
obey Christ. Obey themnot only to win their favor
when their eye is on you, but as slaves of Christ,
doing the will of God fromyour heart. Serve
wholeheartedly, as if you were serving the Lord, not
people, because you know that the Lord will reward
each one for whatever good they do, whether they
are slave or free. And masters, treat your slaves in the
same way. Do not threaten them, since you know that
he who is both their Master and yours is in heaven,
and there is no favoritismwith him(Ephesians 6:5–9).
Paul is speaking to servants and masters, and this raises
many questions in the minds of modern readers about the
Bible’s depiction of the evil of slavery. While much can be said
about this subject,201
it is important to remember that slavery in
the Greco-Roman world was not the same as the New World
institution that developed in the wake of the African slave
trade. Slavery in Paul’s time was not race-based and was
seldomlifelong. It was more like what we would call indentured
servitude. But for our purposes, think of this passage as a
rhetorical amplifier and consider this: If slave owners are told
they must not manage workers in pride and through fear, how
much more should this be true of employers today? And if
slaves are told it is possible to find satisfaction and meaning in
their work, how much more should this be true of workers
today?
The key to Paul’s teaching here is psychological as well as
spiritual. He tells both employees and employers to change
their audience. Who is watching you work? Whomare you
working for? Whose opinion matters most in the end?
For employees. First, workers are told to be wholehearted in
their work (“with sincerity of heart,” verse 5). They are not to
do only the minimumwork necessary to avoid penalty; they are
not to work hard only when their supervisors can observe
them; nor are they to work mindlessly or distractedly. Instead
Christians are to be fully engaged at work as whole persons,
giving their minds, hearts, and bodies fully to doing the best
job possible on the task at hand. Why?
Christian workers can think and work this way because
they have a new motive for their work. They work “as if [they]
were serving the Lord” (verse 5). So because they have an
unimaginable reward in Christ (verse 8), their work does not
have to be unduly tied to the amount of reward that they get
fromtheir masters. A parallel passage reads, “Whatever you
do, work at it with all your heart, as working for the Lord, not
for men, since you know that you will receive an inheritance
fromthe Lord as a reward” (Colossians 3:23–24). The Greek
word “an” before “inheritance” should really be translated as
“the.” Paul is talking about the bliss of the world to come.
Christians, you see, have been set free to enjoy working. If
we begin to work as if we were serving the Lord, we will be
freed fromboth overwork and underwork. Neither the prospect
of money and acclaim, nor the lack of it, will be our controlling
consideration. Work will be primarily a way to please God by
doing his work in the world, for his name’s sake.
Once Christian workers understand this principle, there are
several practical implications. First, they are to serve with
“respect and fear”—a phrase that means on one hand being
courteous and respectful (rather than disdainful) and on the
other hand humbly confident (rather than cringing or servile).
The term“fear” probably means “the fear of the Lord.” In the
Bible, this does not mean to cower in terror of God. Passages
such as Psalm130, verse 4 teach that the more you experience
God’s mercy and forgiveness, the more the true fear of the Lord
will increase in you. This true fear of God means to live in such
awe and wonder, and in such intense love and respect, that
you fear to dishonor himor grieve him. Imagine having in your
home someone whomyou have admired all your life and whom
you never thought you would meet. You revere the person by
reputation, so you will not act casually; you will make every
effort to fulfill his or her every request and wish. This is how
we are to regard God’s interest in our work. Work is to be done
with all your heart and might, as skillfully as you can, and it
should feel not like a burden, but a privilege.
Second, Christians are to work with “sincerity of heart,”
which is literally singleness of heart, a termthat connotes both
focus and integrity. It means our work must be ethical, not
dishonest or duplicitous in any regard. Third, we are to work
“not only to win their favor when their eye is on you.” This
means we do not work hard only when being watched; nor do
we do only what is necessary to get by. Finally, the word
“wholeheartedly” in verse 7 means Christians are to work with
cheerfulness and joy.
For employers. Here Paul tells masters that they are slaves
too—slaves of Christ (verse 9). That is an extraordinary and
radical word to speak into a rigidly hierarchical culture. He is
saying, “Conduct yourself among your servants as if you are a
fellow slave”! It is easy to overlook the little phrase “in the
same way.” In what way? In the way that slaves were to treat
their masters—with the greatest respect for their needs! New
Testament scholar Peter O’Brien writes:
In what is a shocking exhortation to slave owners in
the first-century Greco-Roman world, the apostle
admonishes masters: treat your slaves in the same
way. According to a proverbialstatement known to
Seneca, “allslaves are [our] enemies,” while many
masters were tyrants and abusive. In order to deal
with their slaves, owners were known to threaten
beatings, sexual harassment, or selling male slaves
away fromthe households with the result that they
would be parted forever fromtheir loved ones. Paul’s
cryptic exhortation is outrageous. It does not mean,
however, that masters are to serve their slaves. . . .
likely it points to their attitudes and actions, which,
like those of slaves, are to be governed by their
relationship to their heavenly Lord. An outcome of
this will be that masters will abandon the use of
threats against their slaves. This is not to suggest
that slaves could not be warned of punishment if
they did wrong. Rather, the clause rejects all forms of
manipulating, demeaning, or terrifying slaves by
threats. In the immediate context, slaves have already
been instructed to show respect, sincerity of heart,
and goodwill; now masters are urged to treat themin
a similar manner.202
Paul’s reason for this radical attitude is not only that they
are equal as slaves before the Lord, but also that the Lord (to
whomall are equally accountable) is impartial. There is no
favoritismwith him. God treats no one differently on the basis
of race, class, or education. As Romans 3 shows us, all are
equally judged guilty and all can equally receive grace through
faith. Paul is telling masters in the strongest way, “Don’t think
of yourself as a better person, in better spiritual condition, than
your laborers and slaves.”
Once Christian employers and leaders grasp these
principles, several practical implications follow. First, “do not
threaten them” means that employers are not to use guilt and
coercion to motivate people. We cannot assume that every
servant addressed in this letter had Christian masters or that
the masters had Christian slaves. So these masters could not
assume that their servants were “working as if they were
serving God.” Nevertheless, whether the servant is a Christian
or not, employers are told here not to rely primarily on fear as a
motivation for work. Second, “treat your slaves in the same
way” means, “Look for ways to further the interests of the
people under your leadership even as I just charged themto
seek to serve you.” This means you take an interest in themas
people and invest in their whole lives, not just their productive
work capacity. Third, Paul reminds themthat class distinctions
make no difference to God, and therefore they should not make
much difference to us. Masters are not to be condescending,
demeaning, or haughty.
We all work for an audience, whether we are aware of it or
not. Some performto please parents, others to impress peers,
others to win over superiors, while many do what they do
strictly to live up to their own standards. All of these
audiences are inadequate. Working for themalone will lead to
overwork or underwork—sometimes a mixture of the two,
based on who is watching. But Christians look to an Audience
of One, our loving heavenly Father, and that gives us both
accountability and joy in our work.
The Orientation of a New Compass
If Christians are animated by different virtues, lifted by a
different view of humanity, guided by a different source of
wisdom, and performfor a different audience, what will be
different about the way they act at work? Let me propose a
handful of examples.
Christians should be known to not be ruthless. They
should have a reputation for being fair, caring, and committed
to others. They should be marked by sympathy and by an
unusual willingness to forgive and reconcile. There should be a
lack of vengefulness, sanctimony, and spite.
Years ago I heard one unforgettable example of a Christian
who showed this kind of integrity and compassion. Not long
after we began our new church in New York City, I saw a
young woman who was obviously visiting and darting out
after each service. One week I intercepted her. She told me she
was exploring Christianity. She didn’t believe in it at that point,
but she found a lot of it interesting. I asked her how she had
found Redeemer, and she told me this story.
She worked for a company in Manhattan, and not long after
starting there she made a big mistake that she thought would
cost her the job, but her boss went in to his superior and took
complete responsibility for what she had done. As a result, he
lost some of his reputation and ability to maneuver within the
organization. She was amazed at what he had done and went in
to thank him. She told himthat she had often seen supervisors
take credit for what she had accomplished, but she had never
seen a supervisor take the blame for something she had done
wrong. She wanted to know what made himdifferent. He was
very modest and deflected her questions, but she was
insistent. Finally he told her, “I ama Christian. That means
among other things that God accepts me because Jesus Christ
took the blame for things that I have done wrong. He did that
on the cross. That is why I have the desire and sometimes the
ability to take the blame for others.” She stared at himfor a
long moment and asked, “Where do you go to church?” He
suggested she go to Redeemer, and so she did. His character
had been shaped by his experience of grace in the gospel, and
it made his behavior as a manager attractive and strikingly
different fromthat of others. This lack of self-interest and
ruthlessness on the part of her supervisor was eventually lifetransforming to her.
In addition, Christians should be known to be generous,
and in the workplace this expresses itself in many ways. As
business managers, they can be generous with their time and
investment in their employees and customers. As small
business owners, they can take less personal profit in order to
give customers better value and employees better pay. As
citizens they can be discernibly generous with their time and
money, giving away more of their income than others in their
economic position. They can consider living modestly, below
their potential lifestyle level, in order to be financially generous
with others.
Christians should be also known to be calm and poised in
the face of dif iculty or failure. This may be the most telling
way to judge if a person is drawing on the resources of the
gospel in the development of personal character. In Matthew 6,
verses 19 and 21 Jesus says, “Do not store up for yourselves
treasures on earth, where moths and vermin destroy, and where
thieves break in and steal. . . . For where your treasure is, there
your heart will be also.” What does he mean? Everyone has
treasures—the things we cherish, delight in, and adore above
all other things. We’ve also called themidols, and to
understand themis to understand much of the hierarchy of
your soul and the foundation of your personality. If we get our
main meaning frompeer approval, or money in the bank, or our
reputation for success—then these things are our treasures.
But Jesus rightly points out how radically insecure we are if we
treasure such things. They can be whisked away or stolen.203
And then our very lives can fall apart.
This is why for so many people the prospect of career
reversal or business failure is such a struggle. When our
meaning in life and identity is at stake, we panic, often acting
impulsively, sometimes finding ourselves able to lie and betray
others in order to save ourselves, or we simply plunge into
despair. But Jesus says, rather, “store up for yourselves
treasures in heaven” (verse 20). What does that mean? Paul
tells us that in Christ all treasures are hid (Colossians 2:3), and
Peter says that Jesus was rejected for us, dying to take what
we deserved, and therefore “to you who believe, [he] is
precious” (1 Peter 2:7). (In fact, Peter uses the noun form,
saying literally, “He is preciousness.” Jesus is the standard by
which things can be called valuable.) This is not simply
rhetoric or even abstract theology. The Bible is saying: Only if
Jesus is your treasure are you truly rich, for he is the only
currency that cannot be devalued. And only if he is your
Savior are you truly successful, for status with himis the only
status that can’t be lost.
Finally, Christians should not be seen as sectarian. Many
Christians fail to identify themselves as Christians to their
colleagues. They simply blend in. Others let their faith be
known but speak and act in a way that makes nonbelievers feel
subtly (or overtly) marginalized or disdained. But if we have an
integrated and non-dualistic understanding of work, we know
that many people who are not believers are, through God’s
providence and common grace, given the gifts to do excellent
work. So we will respect and treat those who believe differently
as valued equals in the workplace—and at the same time we
will be unashamed to be identified with Jesus. If a Christian
avoids both of these errors, he or she will be striking an
unusual and healthy balance.
I know a man who began a business some years ago based
on the idea that in a particular sector of financialservices the
existing providers of a particular product were using the
complexity of the instruments and the ignorance of customers
to keep prices high. He believed that a new company, being
more transparent with clients, could offer lower prices and
better service, not only resulting in healthy profits, but also
helping bring reformand integrity to a field that sorely needed
them. When he presented his idea to prospective partners and
employees, he struck a remarkable balance. He said that the
new company was going to be values-driven, and he laid out
those values. He stressed that he was committed to these
values not merely because they would attract clients and drive
revenue, but also because they were the right things to do. He
said that these values grew out of his own Christian faith but,
he quickly added, regardless of the basis for anyone else’s
beliefs, if they were committed to the same values, they were
equal partners. This is an excellent example of being both open
about one’s faith and yet nonexclusive or sectarian about it.
It’s hard to do, and it’s rare; but it can be such a potent force
for good in the workplace.
Christian Ethics in Your Vocation
Even when Christians are working with integrity inside systems
that are not inherently corrupt, it is important for themto ask
larger questions about the ordinary ways that work is done in
their vocation. In particular, Christians must always be
exploring—in communities of faith and practice—how it would
be possible for their field of work to be more just and beneficial
to more people.
So, for example, Christian economist Michael Schluter sums
up the criticisms that Christians and others have leveled at
capitalismin its present-day form.204 Nearly all the problems
usually cited stemfromthe loss of the primacy of human
relationships. First, the increasing size and global reach of
companies distances investors and decision makers fromlocal
communities. So, for example, the directors of the banks of
Baltimore traditionally lived in Baltimore and served on the
boards of the hospitals, museums, and other cultural
institutions there. Now, the senior executives of the banks of
Baltimore live in Charlotte, New York City, or London. They are
almost completely disconnected fromthe needs of the
communities in which so many employees and customers live.
Second, the risk involved in loaning money is shrinking—
sometimes to the point of zero—due to government bailouts
and highly complexfinancial instruments. This means there are
practically no repercussions for bad investments or loans. For
example, if you were a local banker, and you were asked for a
mortgage loan by a would-be homeowner you knew and for a
small business loan by a would-be entrepreneur you knew, you
would do all you could to assess whether the loan would be
fruitful. Will it enable the homeowner to increase her equity?
Will the new business succeed and create wealth and jobs in
the town? As a banker, your downside for a bad decision
would be evident. In today’s environment, all parties are
faceless to one another, and the old accountability systemfor
punishing bad investments and rewarding good ones is
evaporating.
Third, there is the increasing tendency, based on the
factors discussed previously, for managers in pursuit of profit
to take actions to boost their share price quickly at the expense
of the company’s long-termhealth, and also at the expense of
its workers, its customers, and the environment. They can cash
out and leave everyone else poorer, and the stigma of doing so
grows weaker ever year.
Finally, there is the trend of what sociologists call
“commodification,” which is defined as ascribing monetary
value and applying cost-benefit analysis to such things as
relationships, family, and civic engagement. The values of the
market inexorably intrude on all of life. For example, accidents
and tragedies were once dealt with through community support
and spiritual disciplines, but now in the age of litigation,
“mental distress” must be assigned some kind of objective
financial value. So pain gets a number; then in court the
number is argued over. How great was the litigant’s pain and
suffering? How much money will it take to deal with it? A
recent book, The Outsourced Self: Intimate Life in Market
Times, says that private family life is no longer, as historian
and cultural critic Christopher Lasch named it, “a haven in a
heartless world.” The book description summarizes a point that
many have been making for a generation:
The family has long been a haven in a heartless
world, the one place immune to market forces and
economic calculations, where the personal, the
private, and the emotional hold sway. Yet . . . that is
no longer the case: everything that was once part of
private life—love, friendship, child rearing—is being
transformed into packaged expertise to be sold back
to confused, harried Americans. . . . [This volume]
follows the incursions of the market into every stage
of intimate life. Fromdating services that train you to
be the CEO of your love life to wedding planners who
create a couple’s “personal narrative”; from
nameologists (who help you name your child) to
wantologists (who help you name your goals); from
commercialsurrogate farms in India to hired mourners
who willscatter your loved one’s ashes in the ocean
of your choice . . . the most intuitive and emotional of
human acts have become work for hire.205
As we have seen, the triune nature of God, and our being
made in his image, means that human life is fundamentally
relational. But contemporary capitalismincreasingly has the
power to eliminate the intimacy and accountability of human
relationships. So in the marketplace, as in every field, there is
an urgent need for those with a powerful compass.
Theological and ethical reflection on our field of work is not
easy. It is easier by far to focus on your own job and merely
seek to work with personal integrity, skill, and a joyful heart.
That is indeed a major part of what it means for a Christian to
do faithful work, but that is not all it takes. Christians are to
think persistently and deeply about the shape of work in their
field and whether (in biblical terms) it accords as well as
possible with human well-being and with justice.206
And if it doesn’t, what should you do? Most people just
beginning their career are not in a position to make any kind of
broader changes to their field or work environment. But if you
have done the work of sustained reflection, then when you
begin to accumulate more power and influence—and especially
if you are able to begin a new enterprise or business yourself—
it may be possible to make significant changes to how work is
done in such a way that it influences your profession. You
might help lead a financialservices or IT company that delivers
such an unusual amount of transparency to shareholders and
customers that it forces other companies to operate with more
integrity. You might forma filmproduction company, start a
school, or run an art gallery—combining excellence and values
in such a way that it has an impact on many others who are
working in the field. These moves would allow you to “serve
the work” at a whole new level. None of this will happen,
however, unless you begin thinking deeply about your kind of
work now. Only then will you be ready to make the changes if
and when the opportunity presents itself. Work in the hope
that God will open such doors for you in the future.
TWELVE
New Power for Work
Whatever you do, work at it with all your heart.
Colossians 3:23
The Work Under the Work
After finishing her psychiatry residency, a young doctor was
working at a New York City hospital. She was friends with a
doctor who was a few years ahead of her and who was
pregnant with her second child. “Do you know what I love
most about being pregnant?” the older doctor said to her friend
one day. “I love being pregnant because it’s the only time
where I feel productive all the time. Even when I’msleeping,
I’mdoing something!” It struck the young M.D. that her friend
based her self-regard so completely on productivity that she
seemed relieved to finally find a task she could do incessantly.
She reflected, “For many of us, being productive and doing
becomes . . . an attempt at redemption. That is, through our
work, we try to build our worth, security, and meaning.”
207
Many people are trying to get a sense of self through
productivity and success—but that burns themout. For others
the motivation is to bring home a paycheck so they can enjoy
“real life”—but that makes work into a pointless grind. These
motivations are what we could call the “work beneath the
work.” And they are what make work so physically and
emotionally exhausting in the end.
Though Jesus’ twelve apostles left their nets after meeting
him(Luke 5:11), we later see themcontinuing their trade of
fishing. We see Paul continuing to work as a tent maker while
he worked as an evangelist. These are not men who meet Christ
and stop their “secular work” or who dial back their intensity
and passion. Instead, what forever changed was the disciples’
relationship to their work. Jesus gave themthe big picture; in
fact, he was the big picture. He very deliberately called themto
a kind of fishing beyond their fishing: “Don’t be afraid; from
now on you will fish for people” (Luke 5:11). In other words, he
was coming to redeemand heal the world, and he invited his
disciples to be part of this project. Now they had an identity
and significance untethered to their job or financialstatus. So
they could walk away fromit (if that was called for), or pick it
up again, or approach it in a different way frombefore. They
had a new freedomboth from their work and in their work.
Notice that when Jesus called themto follow him, it was at the
moment of great financialsuccess—the huge catch of fish. But
they could, and they did, leave their nets behind. In Jesus’s
presence, they were no longer controlled by their work.
This may allsound very idealistic to us. After all, the sea
wasn’t going to run out of fish and there were no fisherman
bosses who were going to block their reentry to the profession
after their unpaid leave with Jesus. But the story forces us to
ask important questions. Do we let our work control us to such
a degree that we don’t even notice when God comes through
with a new opportunity? Do we get our “big catch”—a yearend bonus or next new job—and immediately start focusing on
the prospect of the next bigger one? How can we have any
freedomfromthe temptations of work and still keep our job?
A fascinating example of this freedomis found in the
second book of Kings, chapter 5. After Naaman, the prime
minister of Syria, is converted to faith in Israel’s God, he does
not abandon his job. Instead he takes a load of dirt fromIsrael
to kneel on whenever he does his state duty of accompanying
the king of Syria into the temple of Rimmon, the Syrian deity.
Rimmon was basically a divinized version of Syria itself. So
Naaman says, in effect, “I willstillserve my nation, but I will no
longer worship my nation. Syria’s national interests are
important to me, but are no longer my ultimate value or god.”
My friend in the private equity firmmade a similar move when
he waived his bonus fromhis organization’s investment in a
venture that was perfectly legal but did not help people
flourish. For both of these men, an encounter with God had
given themthe power to break free of the idols of their
vocational fields. This power freed themfromthe grip of the
work beneath their work.
We have said that the gospel replaces the story that
animates our work, it alters our conception of what work is, and
it reorients the ethical compass we use for work. In addition to
all this, the gospel also gives us new power for work by
supplying us with a new passion and a deeper kind of rest.
The Power of True Passion
One of the words we read and hear about often today is
passion. Passion leads you to excel in whatever you do. But
there are different sources and kinds of passion. Sometimes it
generates frenetic activity more grounded in fear of failure than
in pursuit of success. That kind of passion can produce a lot of
energy, but froma Christian point of view it is a counterfeit. It
is fueled by the work under the work. And it is unsustainable,
like the extreme brightness of a dying lightbulb.
Dorothy Sayers helps us understand the counterfeit
passion that can drive our work. In her book Creed or Chaos?,
Sayers addresses the traditionalseven deadly sins, including
acedia, which is often translated as “sloth.” But as Sayers
explains it, that is a misnomer, because laziness (the way we
normally define sloth) is not the real nature of this condition.
Acedia, she says, means a life driven by mere cost-benefit
analysis of “what’s in it for me.” She writes, “Acedia is the sin
which believes in nothing, cares for nothing, enjoys nothing,
loves nothing, hates nothing, finds purpose in nothing, lives
for nothing and only remains alive because there is nothing for
which it will die. We have known it far too well for many years,
the only thing perhaps we have not known about it is it is a
mortalsin.”
208
Sayers goes on to say that a person characterized by
acedia—in which their driving passion is for their own needs,
comfort, and interests—does not necessarily look lazy at all.
Indeed, this type of person seems to generate lots of activity.
But, she argues, acedia, “the sin of the empty soul,” opens you
to letting all the other sins be the motivations for your work.
It is one of the favorite tricks of this Sin to dissemble
itself under a cover of a whiffling activity of body.
We think that if we are busily rushing about and
doing things we cannot be suffering fromSloth. . . .
Gluttony offers a world of dancing, dining, sports,
and dashing very fast fromplace to place to gape at
beauty spots. . . . Covetousness rakes us out of the
bed at an early hour in order that we may put pep and
hustle into our business; Envy sets us to gossip and
scandals, to writing cantankerous letters to the paper,
and to the unearthing of secrets and scavenging of
desk bins; Wrath provides (very ingeniously) the
argument that the only fitting activity in a world so
full of evil doers and evil demons is to curse loudly
and incessantly: “Whatever brute and blackguard
made the world”; while Lust provides that round of
dreary promiscuity that passes for bodily vigor. But
these are all disguises for the empty heart and the
empty brain and the empty soul of Acedia. . . . In the
world it calls itself Tolerance but in hell it is called
Despair.209
I find this point hits home as a brilliant exposition of
idolatry. Without something bigger than yourself to work for,
then all of your work energy is actually fueled by one of the
other sixdeadly sins. You may work exceptionally hard
because of envy to get ahead of somebody, or because of
pride to prove yourself, or because of greed or even gluttony
for pleasure. In short, acedia is the most subtle idolatry of all. It
puts the cynicalself at the center of your life. And when you
do that you release all the worst vices and sins to be the main
animating energies behind your work.
A main plot device of The Lord of the Rings trilogy is the
corrupting effect of the Ring of Power. When you put on the
Ring, it magnifies your own will to power; and in doing so, it
turns you evil. In a number of places where one of the hobbits
puts on the ring, the description says something to this effect:
“When the Ring goes on, you become the only real thing. You
are a little, dark, solid rock in a ghostly world. Everything else
is vague and shadowy.” In some ways, our contemporary
culture operates like the Ring of Power, magnifying the selfserving nature of sin in every human heart. It tells us in myriad
ways every day that nobody has the right to tell us what is
right or wrong for us—that in the end there is no standard or
authority higher than the Choosing Self. Our consciousness
and our needs are more real than anything else outside us;
there is nothing to which we should submit, nothing that may
trump our own happiness without our permission; and there is
nothing for which we should sacrifice our freedom. But in the
Bible, the very definition of passion—think of Christ’s Passion —is to sacrifice your freedomfor someone else.
Romans 12 addresses this truth at a practical level. Paul
starts this way: “I urge you, brothers and sisters, in view of
God’s mercy, to offer your bodies as living sacrifice” (Romans
12:1). Paul is using temple language; he’s leading us to think
about a worshipper coming with an offering. But he’s not
talking about a sin offering, where you’ve sinned and are now
reconciling with God. Rather, he’s talking about a burnt
offering, which had to be a choice animal fromyour flock—a
strong one, without blemish. The burnt offering was offered as
a way of showing your absolute commitment to God, as if to
say, “Everything I have is yours, with no reservations.” In
other words, it was an expression of passion.
In fact, the term“living sacrifice” is deliberately paradoxical
because sacrifices were dead. That’s part of what it meant to be
a sacrifice. To say to God’s people, “I want you to be a living
slain thing,” is meant to be a jolt; it’s a way of saying you have
to continually be in the rhythmof dying to your own interest
and living for God. That’s the passion God asks of you. What
might this look like? The rest of Romans 12 spells it out, but
there is one particular verse fromthe passage that puts a fine
point on what it means to be a living sacrifice: “Never be
lacking in zeal, but keep your spiritual fervor, serving the Lord”
(Romans 12:11).
There are two specifics in this verse. First, the word “zeal”
is the translation of a Greek word meaning a combination of
urgency and diligence. It is possible to be frenetic—to be
urgent without focus and discipline. It is possible to be
plodding, or diligent without a sense of urgency. But God’s
charge means that you are to be both urgent and disciplined.
Second, when the verse says, “keep your spiritual fervor,” the
Greek literally says, “as to your spirit boiling.” So we are asked
to bring emotion, discipline, and urgency to the task of being
living sacrifices in the lives we lead and the work we do. We
are asked to live with passion.
So where does this true passion come from? Paulstarts the
whole chapter with, “I urge you . . . in view of God’s mercy to
offer your bodies as a living sacrifice.” What is it about God’s
mercy that, if you viewed it, would allow you to become a
living sacrifice—into a person who died to your own needs,
who stopped doing the work under the work, and who
transferred your passion to God? The answer, of course, is
Jesus, the ultimate living sacrifice and the ultimate formof
God’s mercy. When you see Jesus suffer and sacrifice for you,
when his passion is burned into your imagination, it will
become very clear whether the things you are passionate about
are just forms of the other sixdeadly sins.
But why was Jesus suffering? Where was his passion and
sacrifice coming from? In John 17, Jesus Christ looks at his
disciples and says to the Father, “For themI sanctify myself”
(John 17:19). The original word “sanctify” meant to set yourself
apart like an Olympic runner. We know what it means to train
for the Olympics. It means that absolutely everything in life is
subordinated to one goal. It means that every minute of the
day, every activity is done in such a way as to contribute to
that aim. There is a great deal of pain every day, but it is
endured without complaint. Only that level of passion and
commitment can earn the gold.
And so it was with Jesus and his passion. He set himself
apart for the goal of our salvation. He lost everything, endured
everything, to obtain it. Jesus Christ’s passion was for you and
for his Father—not for himself. There is our model. When the
extent and depth of Jesus’s passion for you fully dawns on
your heart, it will generate passion for the work he has called
you uniquely to do in the world. When you realize what he has
done to rescue you, your pride and envy begin to disappear
because you don’t need to get your self-worth frombeing
richer, cooler, more powerful, or more comfortable.
Instead of working out of the false passion of acedia, which
is born of selfishness, you are working out of true passion,
which is born of selflessness. You are adopted into God’s
family, so you already have your affirmation. You are justified
in God’s sight, so you have nothing to prove. You have been
saved through a dying sacrifice, so you are free to be a living
one. You are loved ceaselessly, so you can work tirelessly in
response to a quiet inner fullness.
The Power of Deep Rest
There is a symbiotic relationship between work and rest. Of
course we know this at one level. We get away fromwork in
order to replenish our bodies and minds. Resting, or practicing
Sabbath, is also a way to help us get perspective on our work
and put it in its proper place. Often we can’t see our work
properly until we get some distance fromit and reimmerse
ourselves in other activities. Then we see that there is more to
life than work. With that perspective and rested bodies and
minds, we return to do more and better work.
But the relationship between work and rest operates at a
deeper level as well. All of us are haunted by the work under
the work—that need to prove and save ourselves, to gain a
sense of worth and identity. But if we can experience gospelrest in our hearts, if we can be free fromthe need to earn our
salvation through our work, we will have a deep reservoir of
refreshment that continually rejuvenates us, restores our
perspective, and renews our passion.
To understand this deep rest we need to look at the biblical
meaning of the Sabbath—to understand what it is a sign of,
and what it points to.
Remember the Sabbath day by keeping it holy. Six
days you shall labor and do all your work, but the
seventh day is a Sabbath to the Lord your God. On it
you shall not do any work, neither you, nor your son
or daughter, nor your male or female servant, nor
your animals, nor any foreigner residing in your
towns. For in sixdays the Lord made the heavens and
the earth, the sea, and all that is in them, but he rested
on the seventh day. Therefore the Lord blessed the
Sabbath day and made it holy (Exodus 20:8–11).
Observe the Sabbath day by keeping it holy, as the
Lord your God has commanded you. Sixdays you
shall labor and do all your work, but the seventh day
is a Sabbath to the Lord your God. On it you shall not
do any work, neither you, nor your son or daughter,
nor your male or female servant, nor your ox, your
donkey or any of your animals, nor any foreigner
residing in your towns, so that your male and female
servants may rest, as you do. Remember that you
were slaves in Egypt and that the Lord your God
brought you out of there with a mighty hand and an
outstretched arm. Therefore the Lord your God has
commanded you to observe the Sabbath day
(Deuteronomy 5:12–15).
Exodus 20 ties the observance of a Sabbath day to God’s
creation. “For God rested on the seventh day.” What does this
mean practically? Since God rested after his creation, we must
also rest after ours. This rhythmof work and rest is not only for
believers; it is for everyone, as part of our created nature.
Overwork or underwork violates that nature and leads to
breakdown. To rest is actually a way to enjoy and honor the
goodness of God’s creation and our own. To violate the
rhythmof work and rest (in either direction) leads to chaos in
our life and in the world around us. Sabbath is therefore a
celebration of our design.
Deuteronomy 5 goes on to tie the observance of Sabbath to
God’s redemption. Verse 15 says, “Remember that you were
slaves in Egypt and that the Lord your God brought you out of
there with a mighty hand and an outstretched arm. Therefore
the Lord your God has commanded you to observe the
Sabbath day.” God portrays the Sabbath day as a reenactment
of emancipation fromslavery. It reminds us how he delivered
his people froma condition in which they were not human
beings, but simply units of capacity in Pharaoh’s brick
production system. Anyone who cannot obey God’s command
to observe the Sabbath is a slave, even a self-imposed one.
Your own heart, or our materialistic culture, or an exploitative
organization, or all of the above, will be abusing you if you
don’t have the ability to be disciplined in your practice of
Sabbath. Sabbath is therefore a declaration of our freedom. It
means you are not a slave—not to your culture’s expectations,
your family’s hopes, your medicalschool’s demands, not even
to your own insecurities. It is important that you learn to speak
this truth to yourself with a note of triumph—otherwise you
will feel guilty for taking time off, or you will be unable to truly
unplug.
The Sabbath legislation in Israel was enacted after the
Exodus fromEgypt. It was unique among world cultures at the
time. It limited work, profit taking, exploitation, and economic
production in general. Every seventh day no work could be
done in the fields, and every seventh year the field was to
remain fallow and not be cultivated at all. This surely meant
that in the short run Israel was less economically productive
and prosperous than its neighbors. But it was a land of free
people. In the long run, of course, a deeply rested people are
far more productive.
We are also to think of Sabbath as an act of trust. God
appointed the Sabbath to remind us that he is working and
resting. To practice Sabbath is a disciplined and faithful way to
remember that you are not the one who keeps the world
running, who provides for your family, not even the one who
keeps your work projects moving forward. Entrepreneurs find it
especially difficult to believe this. They have high levels of
competence and very few teammembers. If they don’t put in
the hours, things don’t get done. How easy to fall prey to the
temptation to believe that they alone are holding up their
corner of creation!
But by now you must see that God is there—you are not
alone in your work. Jesus’ famous discourse against worry
(Matthew 6:25–34) is set in the context of work. He chides us
that the plants of the field are cared for, though “they do not
labor or spin” (verse 28). He reminds us that we are obviously
more valuable to God than plants—so we shouldn’t “run after”
material things through our work (verse 32). So if you are
worrying during your rest, you are not practicing Sabbath. It is
a chance to meditate on passages like Matthew 6 until deep
rest begins to penetrate you.
We might conclude that the practical benefits of the
gospel’s Sabbath rest come to us only as individuals, as we
pray and read the Word—but that would be a mistake. God
also strengthens us through the fellowship of community with
other Christians. So for example Paul calls Christians to “carry
each other’s burdens, and in this way you will fulfill the law of
Christ” (Galatians 6:2). And yet we are told that Jesus will
relieve the burdened (Matthew 11:28-30) and that we are to cast
all our cares and burdens on God (1 Peter 5:7) who bears them
daily (Psalm68:19). So which is it? Are we to look to God to
support us under our work and burdens—or to other Christian
brothers and sisters? Obviously the answer is both, because it
is normally through the sympathy and encouragement of
Christian friends that we experience God refreshing us and
supporting us in our work.
The Rest Under the Rest
Come to me, all you who are weary and burdened,
and I will give you rest. Take my yoke upon you and
learn fromme, for I amgentle and humble in heart,
and you will find rest for your souls. For my yoke is
easy and my burden is light (Matthew 11:28–30).
To get the deepest picture of what can happen to our work
after we meet Christ, look at this passage. When Jesus calls all
people to himself, he says he knows we are “weary and
burdened” and that we need “rest.” But Jesus’s cure for our
weariness is a “burden” (verse 30) and even a “yoke” (verse
29)! The yoke or harness put on a beast of burden was a
symbol of slavery and grinding toil. How could this be a
solution to the problemof deep weariness? Jesus says that it is
his yoke and burden—and it is the only one that is light. Why?
“For I amgentle and humble in heart, and you will find rest for
your souls” (verse 29). He is the only boss who will not drive
you into the ground, the only audience that does not need
your best performance in order to be satisfied with you. Why is
this? Because his work for you is finished.
In fact, the very definition of a Christian is someone who
not only admires Jesus, emulates Jesus, and obeys Jesus, but
who “rests in the finished work of Christ” instead of his or her
own. Remember, God was able to rest in Genesis 2, verses 1–3
only because his creative work was finished. And a Christian is
able to rest only because God’s redemptive work is likewise
finished in Christ. When the work under the work has been
satisfied by the Son, all that’s left for us to do is to serve the
work we’ve been given by the Father.
We said before that many people are doing “work under the
work.” They are not merely doing the work that draws the
salary—they are also working to chase away their sense of
insignificance. But here in Jesus we find the “rest under the
rest,” the REM of the soul. Without it, all other work will be
unsatisfying. You won’t be able to relax, even when you are
supposed to be resting. You won’t ever be able to walk away
fromyour nets, even for an evening. You won’t be able to
enjoy the satisfaction that God intended when he called us to
the work he prepared for us.
A classic example of this contrast is in the filmChariots of
Fire, in which one man ran in the Olympics literally “to justify
my existence,” while another man had such deep rest in Christ
that he could miss a likely gold medal by not running on
Sunday. The first man had to get a medal, because he was
doing the work beneath the work. (And at least in the film, the
gold medal wouldn’t even be enough to give himthe deep rest
he sought.) The second man, the devoted Christian Eric
Liddell, did not care in the same way whether he won Olympic
medals or not. He was at rest. He told his sister that God had
simply made himfast, and “when I run, I feel his pleasure.” He
ran for the joy of running itself, and to delight the one who
gave himthe gifts to do so.
Remember John Coltrane’s quote at the beginning of this
book:
During the year 1957, I experienced, by the grace of
God, a spiritual awakening which was to lead me to a
richer, fuller, more productive life. At that time, in
gratitude, I humbly asked to be given the means and
privilege to make others happy through music . . . to
inspire themto realize more and more of their
capacities for living meaningful lives. Because there
certainly is meaning to life. I feel this has been
granted through His grace. ALL PRAISE TO GOD.
Coltrane was once like everyone else. He had said deep in
his heart, “If I get really good, if I’msuccessful, if people
applaud and appreciate me, then I’ll know I’msignificant; I’ll
know my life is worth something.” But that kind of inner
dynamic does not usually produce the best work—or the
deepest rest. As C.S. Lewis observed,
You will never make a good impression on other
people until you stop thinking about what sort of
impression you are making. Even in literature and art,
no man who bothers about originality will ever be
original: whereas if you simply try to tell the truth
(without caring two pence how often it has been told
before) you will, nine times out of ten, become
original without ever having noticed it. . . . Give up
yourself, and you will find your realself.210
Something happened to Coltrane to reveal his self. One
night, after an exceptionally brilliant performance of the suite, A
Love Supreme—a thirty-two-minute outpouring of praise to
God—he stepped down fromthe stage and was heard to say,
“Nunc dimittis.” These are Simeon’s words in Luke 2 after he
had seen the promised Messiah. They mean, essentially, “I
could die happy now.” Coltrane claimed to have had an
experience of God’s love that liberated himfrom the work under
the work for the sake of the work itself. He had been given
God’s power and had felt God’s pleasure.211 Coltrane had
stopped making music for his own sake. He did it for the
music’s sake, the listener’s sake, and God’s sake.
In the Christian view, the way to find your calling is to look
at the way you were created. Your gifts have not emerged by
accident, but because the Creator gave themto you. But what
if you’re not at the point of running in the Olympics or leading
on a world stage? What if you’re struggling under an unfair
boss or a tedious job that doesn’t take advantage of all your
gifts? It’s liberating to accept that God is fully aware of where
you are at any moment and that by serving the work you’ve
been given you are serving him.
This is what Dorothy Sayers meant when she urged us to
serve the work. And it is what Tolkien was getting at in “Leaf
by Niggle.” When your heart comes to hope in Christ and the
future world he has guaranteed—when you are carrying his
easy yoke—you finally have the power to work with a free
heart. You can accept gladly whatever level of success and
accomplishment God gives you in your vocation, because he
has called you to it. You can work with passion and rest,
knowing that ultimately the deepest desires of your heart—
including your specific aspirations for your earthly work—will
be fulfilled when you reach your true country, the new heavens
and new earth. So in any time and place you can work with joy,
satisfaction, and no regrets. You, too, can say, “Nunc
dimittis.”
R
Epilogue
Leading People to Integrate Faith and Work
edeemer Presbyterian Church has made vocational
discipleship—helping people integrate their faith and
work—a major focus of its overall ministry for almost ten
years. Our particular church community lives as “resident
aliens” in a huge city that is about 3 percent Christian. Many
people are struggling to hold on to their faith as they try to
contribute in their work communities. Others want their
association with Jesus to be attractive; they don’t want to
widen the disconnect between the church and the people of
the city. And still others are brand-new to the Christian faith
and don’t have a clue what it means to be a follower of Jesus in
their whole life, including work. The challenge is to deepen the
faith and theology of our congregation as well as enable them
to engage the city with the love and truth of the gospel. We’ve
sought to help our congregation live out the gospel in all
spheres of culture in a way that seeks “the peace and
prosperity” (Jeremiah 29:7) of the city in which God has placed
us.
The letter that Jeremiah sent fromJerusalemto the elders,
priests, and people of Israel who had been carried into exile in
Babylon has been influential in establishing the purpose and
the tone of our ministry. First of all, the letter makes it clear that
the Lord God claims responsibility for carrying his people into
exile in the first place. When facing the trials of life in the big
city and the demands of a high-pressure career it helps to
remember God’s sovereignty so that, by definition, we can be
sure we are where he wants us to be. Second, he asks his
people to seek the peace and prosperity of Babylon “because if
it prospers, you too will prosper.” As a congregation, we
understand ourselves to be a small minority whomGod has
called to love and serve the city, our professions, our
workplaces, and our neighborhoods. We seek to draw others
into a redeeming and renewing faith, but also to serve
alongside those who don’t believe as we do, for the good of
the city and the world. Discipleship for resident aliens, or
exiles, is different fromdiscipleship in a culture in which the
Christian faith is assumed and the goal is to draw people back
into something the culture already tells themthey should do.
At Redeemer we call the former “exilic discipleship.”
Redeemer also has been shaped by a deep commitment to
the promise that the gospel changes everything—in our hearts,
our community, and our world. In the words of Abraham
Kuyper, “There is not a square inch in the whole domain of our
human existence over which Christ, who is Sovereign over all,
does not cry: ‘Mine!’”
212 Our faith and work ministry has
sought to explore the power and promise of the the Christian
story to change, redeem, and renew every aspect of our work
lives, our work relationships, and the world we touch through
the work we do.
As we’ve attempted to lead people into a better integration
of faith and work, it’s been important to pay attention to who
they are. Most are seriously career minded—seeking careers in
fields such as law, arts, finance, business, education,
healthcare, technology, government, architecture, or
advertising. They are also young (average age is thirty-three),
70 percent are single, and they are early in their careers. After
nine years, with more than 1,500 people involved and over 150
volunteer leaders, we have been able to identify some of the
specific ways of thinking (stories or worldviews) and some
explicit behaviors (practices or habits) that are foundational for
our people to enable themto more fully live out the gospel in
their work.
When leading a change it is helpful to think about where
you are and where you’re going. The left column of the chart
on the following page lists various beliefs or ways of thinking
that are the starting point for many people in our church. They
are presuppositions that shape the story they live by, as we
discussed in Chapter 9. The right column gives the
corresponding belief that we teach, seeking to help them
reshape the story by which they live. These ideas, when they
become real enough to us, actually change how we think, feel,
and act. Most of these ideas have been elaborated in detail in
this book in far more elegant language; this list is simply how
we capture these most essential mind shifts that move a person
toward a fuller application of the gospel in their work.
Change from Change to
1. Individualsalvation The gospel changes
everything (hearts,
community, and world)
2. Being good Being saved
3. Cheap grace Costly grace (awareness of
our sin)
4. Heaven is “up there” Christ will come again—to
this earth
5. God is value-add to us In God’s providence, we
could contribute to his work
on earth
6. Idols of this world Living for God
7. Disdain of this world Engaged in this world
8. “Bowling alone” Accepting community
9. People matter Institutions matter
10. Christian superiority God can work through
whomever he wants
(common grace)
Many young adults come to us fromother cities and were
raised in evangelical churches that limited their application of
the gospel to individualsalvation. A large part of our ministry
is focused on broadening their understanding of the gospel to
apply it to our communities (in the formof gospel-changed
relationships) and our organizations, city, and culture.
Many faith and work ministries focus on ethics—how to be
good, honest, and fair. As we explained at the end of Chapter 7,
it is very difficult (and even incompatible with the gospel) to
just strive to be a good or heroic person, like Esther. A focus
on being good distracts us fromcoming to terms with our sin;
and it is because of our sin that Christ needed to die. We want
to help people understand that the more they can recognize
their own sin, the more they will experience God’s grace. A life
of gratitude for being saved is far more pleasing than a life
based on self-righteousness over being good. This leads us to
the next point—that the price God paid for us was costly. As
we contemplate the death of Christ on the cross for us, we are
both humbled and motivated to give ourselves back to himin
return.
The next two points also go together. A heaven with just
our souls floating around is very different fromone in which
we’re living in the most beautiful city we could imagine on this
earth: a city in which our paintings of trees (see the
Introduction) or our clever new tools are more perfect than we
could imagine themin this broken world. This understanding
gives importance to the materiality of our surroundings. It
gives us the motivation to give our best to contribute to the
flourishing of the world now and this kingdomto come.
Chapter 8 was about idols. Our idols block our relationship
with God and make us proud. We try to help people identify
the idols of their profession and the idols they use to cope with
the thorns and thistles of life and the desperate peril of
existence without God. Each time we strip away an idol we can
turn to God, and our trust in himgrows.
In our individualistic environment we have significant
resistance to the biblical idea of community. Of course,
everyone says they want community, friendship, and love. But
mention the words “accountability” or “commitment” and
people run the other way. We work hard to demonstrate how
God works in and through community; he even created the
church so that we would work to share his gospel together. We
also are constantly faced with the excellence and the
generosity and the love of the people around us who don’t
know Christ. “How can it be that the person I work with acts
like a better person than the Christians I know?” We get
excited every time a famous football or basketball player is
revealed to be a Christian, as though that somehow puts us in
the excellence club in the eyes of the world. It’s challenging to
seek to be distinctive in how we work through the power of the
resources Jesus has given us and yet, at the same time, see
hundreds of other people who don’t have those gospel
resources outperformand out-distinguish us. Understanding
common grace is key to our humility and appreciation of God’s
sovereignty.
The last thing we want to imply is that a gospel-filled work
life is one of ten key rules or ideas—that is the quickest way to
become self-righteous and blunt the beauty of the gospel. But
it has been helpful to us to have some of the ideas in this book
boiled down to a few phrases so we can help coach people
toward more theologically sound thinking about their lives at
work.
Instead our prayer is that, in wrestling with who God is and
how to relate to him, our church will grow in humility, love,
truth, grace, and justice; and that our neighbors in the city will
flourish because we were here.
Redeemer’s Center for Faith & Work
In 2002 Redeemer Presbyterian Church reorganized to focus on
five primary areas of ministry in New York City: Worship &
Evangelism, Community Formation, Mercy & Justice, Church
Planting, and Faith & Work. In recruiting me (Katherine) to
create a faith and work ministry, Redeemer was beginning to
develop a vision to renew the city’s institutions of culture
through the people of the congregation who were employed in
vocations throughout the city. I was stunned by the
enthusiastic response fromthe congregation. I’ve launched
lots of new products or services in my life, spending months
and huge budgets on advertising and promotion, but this time
the phone started ringing before I was even officially
introduced.
Redeemer’s CFW (Center for Faith & Work) started with no
budget but huge pent-up demand. In 2003 the congregation
was approximately three thousand worshippers a week, a good
portion who were new to the Christian faith. Many were early
in their careers and struggling to keep up with the daily
demands of their work, let alone live out their faith. There was a
dearth of mentors or role models within the church community.
We held a series of classes, led by some elders together
with me, on topics such as vocational decision-making,
leadership, and theology of work. We wanted to explore what
the Bible had to say about concerns facing our congregation
on a daily basis and to better understand our community’s
needs. A survey of several hundred participants in the classes
revealed that:
• 6 percent had shared their faith in some way at work
• 55 percent prayed about their work
• 50 percent of all respondents responded affirmatively that
they struggle to balance or integrate their desires with
God’s desire for their lives
• Very few recognized any way their work itself contributed
to society.213
In 2005 Redeemer was able to raise money through a
churchwide capital campaign enabling it to build out CFW over
the next five years. The mission is to equip, connect, and
mobilize our church community in their vocationalspheres
toward gospel-centered transformation for the common goal.
Each of the goals of equipping, connecting, and mobilizing is
important to help people work differently in light of the gospel.
Many groups of Christians gather to meet one another, but
without common frameworks for thinking about their faith, the
discussions remain shallow. Churches often view themselves
only in the business of teaching, assuming that if they’ve
taught it, their congregation will apply it. But the study of adult
learning has shown that people change only when they hear
the new thinking (so we equip them), can discuss it among their
peers (so we connect them), and can apply it in simulated or
actualsituations (so we try to mobilize them).
We also look at our programs in terms of the number of
people they reach and the amount of resources we invest. The
higher the commitment made by the participant, the more we’ll
invest. Hence, we make a significant investment in our
intensive, year-long GothamFellowship, which willserve forty
people in 2012–13. At the base of the pyramid (as depicted on
the following page), there are many in the congregation who
can invest only a weekend for a conference or one night for a
lecture. Many participants share the cost of these programs,
albeit for a short-termcommitment. A brief description of the
programs developed by CFW can be found on our website
(www.faithandwork.org), and some are highlighted on the next
page.
Vocation Groups
Vocation Groups at Redeemer typically meet monthly and are
sometimes supplemented with specialspeaker programs or
social events. Each group is volunteer-led by a teamcommitted
to helping others in their profession meet, deepen in their faith,
and explore the challenges and opportunities of their field in
light of the gospel. The leader teams are innovative in their
design of formats and topics. At the moment, Redeemer has
numerous active Vocation Groups: Actors, Advertisers,
Architecture, Engineering & Construction, Business, Dancers,
Educators, Entrepreneurs, Fashion, Film, Finance, Healthcare,
Higher Education, Information Technology, International
Diplomacy, Law, Ph.D. Students, Visual Arts, and Writers.
Figure 1
Gotham Fellowship
GothamFellowship (named after Washington Irving’s
nickname for New York) is an intensive nine-month theological
and leadership development programfor young professionals
in all vocations. Studying originalsources such as Augustine,
Calvin, Owen, and Luther, the Fellows grow in their ability to
apply the gospel to their hearts, their relationships, and their
understanding of their vocation. The programdevelops
theological frameworks and spiritual practices that can be
applied to the real-life situations of their work lives. In its fifth
year, GothamFellowship has more than one hundred alumni
serving in the church and in their chosen fields, who also
continue to meet together periodically to “spur one another on
to love and good works” (Hebrews 10:24).
Entrepreneurship Initiative (Ei)
Redeemer has been committed to serving New York not only
by helping plant new churches to reach out to those who don’t
go to church or follow Jesus, but also by helping build an
ecosystemof organizations and institutions that serve the city.
The Eisupports entrepreneurs with a Business Plan
Competition that invites early-stage entrepreneurs to think
more theologically and strategically about their ventures.
Winners are given a small grant and coaching frommore
seasoned entrepreneurs in the church community. The Ei has
created a network of investors, senior leaders and coaches,
experienced entrepreneurs, and early-stage entrepreneurs
working together to serve the city with new gospel-centered
ventures.
Arts Ministries
Between fifteen and twenty percent of Redeemer’s
congregation work in the arts—in music, theater, visual arts,
dance, writing, design, and so on. Many artists in New York
have felt particularly misunderstood or even rejected by the
church because they are doing work that is not explicitly
Christian, meaning directly for the church or containing an
obvious Christian message. Our Arts Ministries engage artists
in the theology of art and culture and provide opportunities for
artists to share their work and collaborate on projects together.
Church-Based Discipleship
Redeemer and CFW believe that it is extremely valuable to have
the faith and work ministry integrated into the life of the
church. Many people have asked if we plan to spin it off into
its own independent nonprofit, and the answer is “no.” Our
goal has been to model our conviction that vocational life is
essential to being fully human in a biblicalsense. Churches
need to embrace the whole person—the married or single
person, the healthy or ill person, the person at work and the
person at home. Church-based faith and work ministry is
important for two reasons: (1) work is often the crucible in
which God shines a light on a person’s idols and refines them
in Christ-likeness, and (2) the church is touching the world at
large through the faithful presence of its people in the
workplace. The last ten years have shown us that faith and
work ministry is so vital to the life of the congregation that it
shouldn’t be ignored. It draws in cultural influencers to become
more shaped by the gospel; it provides the church a greater
shared vision to serve the world; and it gives the church
greater credibility in the culture in which it serves.
While most churches are smaller than Redeemer and would
need to shape their ministry to integrate faith and work very
differently, we encourage every church to develop something
that fits its own context. Most churches could develop
vocation groups to discuss the particular challenges and
opportunities for workers in three basic fields: business, arts,
and human services. Alternately, the pastor could gather a
group of twelve to twenty-four people in different professions
to read a book like Os Guinness’s The Call or Al Wolters’s
Creation Regained and discuss its implications for their own
lives. Redeemer has found that people are seeking far more
theologicalstudy in order to navigate the challenges of their
vocation, and they long for their pastor to be interested in
learning more about the situations they face on a daily basis.
NOTES
FOREWORD
1. Rev. C. John “Jack” Miller was Senior Pastor of the New Life
Presbyterian Church, which the author’s family
attended during the mid-1980s. While this quote does
not, to our knowledge, appear in a published book of
Jack’s, it was a frequent saying in his preaching and
teaching.
INTRODUCTION
2. Robert N. Bellah, “Is There a Common American Culture?,”
www.robertbellah.com/articles_6.htm.
3. Robert Bellah, Richard Madsen, WilliamM. Sullivan, Ann
Swidler, and Steven M. Tipton, Habits of the Heart:
Individualism and Commitment in American Life
(Berkeley: University of California Press, 1985), 287–88.
4. For a good overview of the history of the modern “Faith at
Work” movement, and especially of its sources in the
ecumenical, mainline churches, see David W. Miller,
God at Work: The History and Promise of the Faith at
Work Movement (Oxford, 2007). Miller recounts how
several evangelicalstudent organizations—especially
the Student Volunteer Movement and the World
Student Christian Federation (later the Student
Christian Movement)—shifted their focus in the early
twentieth century away fromevangelismand foreign
missions and toward more social concerns. This gave
rise to a number of new conferences and agencies,
including the Faith and Order group and the Life and
Work group, which eventually joined to become the World Council of Churches (p. 163, n.43). The 1937
World Conference of the Life and Work group in Oxford
was particularly concerned with the impact of faith on
work and economics. It was led by Joseph H. Oldham,
who wrote that before the church stood “a great
historic task—the task of restoring the lost unity
between worship and work” (Miller, God at Work, 31).
Most of the books written in the mid–twentieth century
on the biblical view of work arose fromthese mainline,
ecumenical circles, and the emphasis was on how
Christian faith made work more sensitive to social
ethics. These included Alan Richardson, The Biblical
Doctrine of Work (SCM Press, 1952); Work and
Vocation, ed., J.O. Nelson, (Harper and Brothers, 1954);
W.R. Forrester, Christian Vocation (Scribner, 1953);
Hendrik Kraemer, A Theology of the Laity
(Westminster, 1958); and Stephen Neill and Hans-Ruedi
Weber, The Layman in Christian History (Westminster,
1963), perhaps the only church history text highlighting
the work not of ministers and missionaries but of lay
Christian professionals working outside the church. On
a more popular level, the works of Elton Trueblood were
important, especially Your Other Vocation (Harper and
Brothers, 1952).
5. In the mid–twentieth century a renaissance occurred in the
church of lay-led small group fellowships. This
movement had many branches—one was adoption of
small group ministry by the newly founded post–World
War II evangelical campus ministries such as InterVarsity Christian Fellowship, Campus Crusade for
Christ, and the Navigators. But perhaps the key figure
was the Episcopal priest the Reverend SamShoemaker,
who founded Faith at Work in New York City and later
the Pittsburgh Experiment—two organizations based on
lay-led small groups that included a focus on reaching
people in the business world and having an impact on
the workplace (Miller, God at Work, 32).
6. The mainline church understood the relationship of faith to
work primarily as an effort to apply just, social ethics to
capitalism—which was viewed with suspicion. Many
conservative evangelicals were by contrast much more
individualistic in their understanding of Christian faith.
They were more positive toward market capitalismand
so did not put their reformemphasis there. Instead their
greatest concern was the need for personal decision
and salvation. Therefore, to be a Christian at work
meant primarily to evangelize your co-workers. Groups
such as the Pentecostal organization Full Gospel
Business Men’s Fellowship, founded by Demos
Shakarian, and the Fellowship of Companies for Christ,
International, were distinct frommainline movements,
since they emphasized personal ethics over social
ethics—that is, working with integrity and honesty—as
well as equipping people in business to evangelize their
colleagues (Miller, God at Work, 51).
7. Luther, Calvin, and the other Protestant Reformers
formulated their doctrine of work in contrast to that of
the medieval Roman Catholic Church. The medievals
saw human labor as a necessity for acquiring temporal
goods of this life, but not of much use for achieving the
eternal goods of the next life. So work was a peripheral
matter. The Reformers, however, saw human work at the
very center of God’s purpose for human life. The
Calvinists saw it as a way of continuing God’s creative
work of building a God-honoring culture. Lutherans saw
it as a vehicle for God’s providential work of caring for
his creation. But the Catholic theology of work did not
remain static. Beginning with the encyclical of Pope Leo
XIII’s Rerum Novarum in 1891 and continuing to that of
Pope John Paul II’s Laborem Exercens in 1981, we can
see a major shift. Pope Paul VI, for example, comments
on Genesis chapter 1, verse 28, where God tells human
beings to “fill the earth and subdue it,” by saying, “the
Bible, fromthe first page on, teaches us that the whole
creation is for man, that it is his responsibility to
develop it by intelligent effort, and by means of this
labor to perfect it, so to speak, for his use” (quoted in
Lee Hardy, The Fabric of This World: Inquiries into
Calling, Career Choice, and the Design of Human
Work [Eerdmans, 1990], 71). Many have pointed out the
similarities between the Catholic understanding of
natural law and the Reformed understanding of common
grace, namely, that God gives wisdomand insight to all
people, including non-Christians, so they can enrich the
world through their work. In summary, today there is no
longer a great divide between Catholic social teaching
on the importance of work and that of the Protestant
Reformation (see Hardy, Fabric of This World, 67ff.).
8. Much more on the contributions of the Protestant Reformers
to our understanding of work is presented in future
chapters.
9. “Leaf by Niggle” was first published in The Dublin Review
in January 1945. There is some debate about when it
was written. Tolkien’s biographer Humphrey Carpenter
believes it was written close to the time it was
requested, in September 1944 (see Humphrey Carpenter,
Tolkien: A Biography [Ballantine Books, 1977], 220–1),
but TomShippey believes it was written closer to the
start of World War II (see T.A. Shippey, JRR Tolkien:
Author of the Century [Houghton Mifflin, 2000], 266).
The story can be found today in J.R.R. Tolkien, Tree
and Leaf and The Homecoming of Beorhtnoth
(HarperCollins, 2001), and J.R.R. Tolkien, The Tolkien
Reader (Del Rey, 1986). These texts contain both “Leaf
by Niggle” and Tolkien’s classic essay “On Fairy
Stories.” The quotes from“Leaf by Niggle” in this
section are taken fromJ.R.R. Tolkien, “Leaf by Niggle”
in Tree and Leaf and The Homecoming of Beorhtnoth,
93–118.
10. This quote and the immediately following account of
Tolkien’s mind-set are taken fromHumphrey Carpenter,
Tolkien, 220–1 and 293–4.
11. Ibid., 221.
12. Quoted in Shippey, JRR Tolkien, 267.
13. Shippey cites the Old English poem“Bede’s Death-Song,”
which begins, “Before the need-fare.” A “need fare”
was a compulsory journey, a long journey that all have
to make, and it begins (Bede says) on one’s “deathday.” Ibid.
14. Tolkien, “Leaf by Niggle,” 109–10.
15. TomShippey and Humphrey Carpenter represent two
somewhat different interpretations of the ending of the
story. Carpenter says Niggle’s tree is a “true part of
creation”—that is, it was there all along, part of the
glorious true country of God. As an artist, Niggle was
giving the world a very partial glimpse of this coming
world, this underlying truth. Shippey is even more
ambitious. He writes, “Niggle’s reward is to find his
picture come true [my emphasis] at the end of his
journey, his ‘sub-creation’ accepted by the Creator”
(pp. 276–7). In other words, Niggle’s artistic imagination
has been made real by God in the heavenly country as a
reward.
16. Shippey points out that originally The Dublin Review asked
Tolkien for a work of “Catholic humanity” (p. 266). In
other words, Tolkien saw his story as expressing a
specifically Christian and Catholic understanding of
creativity and art. Shippey points out that in the
heavenly realmas depicted there is a “shepherd,”
obviously a reference to Christ (p. 277).
17. See the famous essay by Tolkien, “On Fairy Stories,” in
Tolkien, Tree and Leaf, 3ff.
18. Carpenter’s words in Tolkien, 221.
19. Ibid.
CHAPTER 1—THE DESIGN OF WORK
20. Old Testament scholar Victor Hamilton writes, “God’s
creative activity is described twice as his work. The OT
has two words for “labor.” The second word
emphasizes labor that is raw and unskilled. The first—
and the one used here—designates skilled labor, work
that is performed by a craftsman or an artisan. Such is
the measure of the finesse and professionalskills of
God’s work.” V.P. Hamilton, The Book of Genesis:
Chapters 1–17 (Eerdmans, 1990), 142.
21. As many places in the Old Testament insist, the six-day
workweek, with a day of rest for everyone, even
servants and livestock, made Israel different fromits
neighbors. “In Egypt there was no day of interruption
of the unending round of forced labor; Moses’s
requests for time to worship were met by Pharaoh with
scorn; but Yahweh ‘brought themout fromthere’ and
so commands themto celebrate the sabbath day as a
“stopping day” proclaiming not only their dependence
upon Yahweh but also their independence of all other
peoples and powers. J.I. Durham, Word Biblical
Commentary: Exodus (Word, 2002), 290.
22. A good, brief compilation of ancient creation myths can be
found in the Encyclopedia Britannica Online at
http://www.britannica.com/EBchecked/topic/142144/creationmyth.
23. Biblicalscholar Gerhard von Rad has argued that, unlike
any of its neighbors, Israel could conceive of no divine
powers on a par with the Lord. Gerhard von Rad,
Wisdom in Israel (SCM Press, 1970), 304.
24. See Hesiod’s Works and Days, lines 109–29. The English
translation can be found online at Elpenor: Home of the
Greek Word, http://www.ellopos.net/elpenor/greektexts/ancient-greece/hesiod/works-days.asp?pg=4.
25. G.J. Wenham, Word Biblical Commentary, vol. 1, Genesis
1–15 (Word, 2002), 35.
26. Ibid., 34.
27. For more on this, see Chapter 3, “Work as Cultivation.”
28. For more on this, see Chapter 4, “Work as Service.”
29. Ben Witherington, Work: A Kingdom Perspective on Labor
(Eerdmans, 2011), 2.
30. Lester DeKoster, Work: The Meaning of Your Life (Grand
Rapids, MI: Christian Library Press, 1982), 17.
31. Dorothy Sayers, “Why Work?” in Creed or Chaos?
(Harcourt, Brace, 1949), 53.
32. For more on this concept, see Timothy Keller, “Is
Christianity a Straitjacket?” The Reason for God: Belief
in an Age of Skepticism (Dutton, 2008).
33. John Calvin, Institutes of the Christian Religion, ed. John
T. McNeill, trans. Ford Lewis Battles (Westminster
Press, 1960), III.10.2.720–1.
34. Anglican hymn by WilliamHenry Monk, “All Things Bright
and Beautiful.”
35. Pieper, Leisure, 33.
CHAPTER 2—THE DIGNITY OF WORK
36. Ayn Rand, Atlas Shrugged (Penguin, 1999), 782.
37. Adriano Tilgher, Work: What It Has Meant to Men Through
the Ages (Arno Press, 1977), quoted in Lee Hardy, The
Fabric of This World: Inquiries into Calling, Career
Choice, and the Design of Human Work (Eerdmans,
1990), 7.
38. Aristotle, Politics, I.VIII.9, and Nicomachean Ethics, X.7,
both quoted in Ibid.
39. Plato, Phaedo, in Plato in Twelve Volumes, vol. 1, trans.
Harold North Fowler (Harvard University Press, 1966).
40. Hardy, Fabric of This World, 27.
41. This is Luc Ferry’s summary of Epictetus’s teaching. See
Luc Ferry, A Brief History of Thought: A Philosophical
Guide to Living, trans. Theol Cuffe (HarperCollins,
2010), 45.
42. Leland Ryken, Work and Leisure in Christian Perspective
(Multnomah, 1987), 64.
43. Hardy, Fabric of This World, 16.
44. Derek Kidner, Genesis: An Introduction and Commentary
(Inter-Varsity Press, 1967), 61.
45. Alec Motyer, Look to the Rock: An Old Testament
Background to Our Understanding of Christ (Kregel,
1996), 71.
46. V.P. Hamilton, The Book of Genesis: Chapters 1–17
(Eerdmans, 1990), 135.
47. Phillip Jensen and Tony Payne, Beginnings: Eden and
Beyond, Faith Walk Bible Studies (Crossway, 1999), 15.
48. Jeff Van Duzer, Why Business Matters to God (And What
Still Needs to Be Fixed) (Inter-Varsity Press, 2010), 28–
9.
CHAPTER 3—WORK AS CULTIVATION
49. Derek Kidner, Genesis, 61.
50. Some commentators point out that, even though Adamand
Eve are told to “rule” over the animals and “subdue”
them, Genesis chapter 1, verse 29 shows that this
original dominion did not even allow themto kill animals
or use their flesh for food. Only after the flood in
Genesis chapter 9 does God give permission to
consume animals as food. So “rule” and “subdue”
cannot mean “exploit.” See V.P. Hamilton, The Book of
Genesis: Chapters 1–17 (Eerdmans, 1990), 139.
51. Albert N. Wolters, Creation Regained: A Transforming
View of the World (Eerdmans, 1985), 36.
52. http://www.tufenkian.com/about/james-tufenkian.xhtml
53. Mark Noll, The Scandal of the Evangelical Mind
(Eerdmans, 1995), 51.
54. You are doing what God has done, if—and this is a big
“if”—your project does not add value to human life but
only makes you a profit. The most obvious examples of
things in this allegory are illegal drug dealing and
pornography. But there are plenty of other projects—
many coming to light in the recent recession—that
made short-termprofits for individual deal makers even
though it was obvious the deals were not good for the
institutions, for many customers and shareholders, or
for society as a whole.
55. Andy Crouch, Culture-Making: Recovering Our Creative
Calling (Inter-Varsity Press, 2008), 47.
CHAPTER 4—WORK AS SERVICE
56. Most of my biblical quotations use the New International
Version translation of the Bible. Here I use the English
Standard Version because I believe it better brings out
the sense of the original Greek text.
57. A point of controversy is that in verse 21 Paul denotes
slavery as a “calling” in which it is possible to serve
God. It is beyond our scope to enter into this
discussion (though see Chapter 9 on our new motive
and Ephesians chapter 6). It is important to observe that
(a) in verse 21 Paul told Christians who were slaves to
acquire their freedomif they could, and (b) we must not
think that allslavery in ancient times was like modern
chattelslavery. For an excellent treatment of this
passage, see R.E. Ciampa and B.S. Rosner, The First
Letter to the Corinthians (Eerdmans, 2010), 306–28.
They write, “Paul has been careful not to make light of
the circumstances of Christian slaves” (p. 327).
58. Ibid., 308–9.
59. Quoted in Ibid., 309.
60. Robert Bellah, Richard Madsen, WilliamM. Sullivan, Ann
Swidler, and Steven M. Tipton, Habits of the Heart:
Individualism and Commitment in American Life
(University of California Press, 1985), 287–8.
61. Ciampa and Rosner, First Letter to the Corinthians, 309,
n.184.
62. See Louis Berkhof, Systematic Theology (Eerdmans, 1949),
569.
63. It is interesting to remember that Luther’s other great
opponents in the Reformation were the Anabaptists of
the “Radical Reformation.” The Anabaptists saw the
public realmas essentially the realmof Satan and
forbade their members to fulfill civil offices such as
policeman, magistrate, and the like. Ironically, though
the Anabaptists charged Reformers like Luther and
Calvin with not rejecting the Catholic tradition enough,
they had as negative a view of “ secular” work in the
world as did the Catholic Church at the time. Luther’s
(and Calvin’s) teaching of all work as God’s vocation
therefore was set against both the Catholic Church and
the Anabaptists.
64. Martin Luther, Three Treatises (Fortress, 1970), 12.
65. The translation of Luther cited makes use of the King James
Version. See the translation by Edward Sittler in
Luther’s Works: Selected Psalms III, ed., J. Pelikan, vol.
14 (Concordia, 1958).
66. Ibid., 95.
67. Luther’s Large Catechism: With Study Questions, trans. F.
SamuelJanzow (Concordia, 1978), 90.
68. Pelikan, Luther’s Works, vol. 14, 95.
69. Ibid., 96.
70. Ibid., 100.
71. Ibid., 96.
72. Luther’s Works, Sermon on the Mount and the Magnificat
ed. J. Pelikan, vol. 21, (Concordia, 1958), 237.
73. Hardy, Fabric, 45.
74. This is fromhis preface to the complete edition of Luther’s
Latin Writings (Wittenberg, 1545), printed in Luther’s
Works, vol. 34, Career of the Reformer (Fortress, 1960),
336–8.
75. Luther’s Works, Genesis Chapters 6–14, eds. J. Pelikan and
D.E. Poellot, vol. 2 (Concordia, 1960), 348.
76. Luther’s Works, Sermon on the Mount, vol. 21, 367.
77. Dorothy Sayers, “Why Work?” in Creed or Chaos?
(Harcourt, Brace, 1949), 51.
78. Sayers, “Creed or Chaos?” in Creed or Chaos?, 42–3.
79. Ibid.
80. Lester DeKoster, Work: The Meaning of Your Life
(Christian Library Press, 1982), 5, 7, 9–10.
81. Sayers, Creed or Chaos?, 56–7.
82. Recounted in WilliamE. Diehl, The Monday Connection: A
Spirituality of Competence, Af irmation, and Support
in the Workplace, (HarperCollins, 1991), 25–6.
83. Ibid., 29.
84. Ibid.
85. John Calvin, Institutes of the Christian Religion, ed. John
T. McNeill, trans. Ford Lewis Battles (Westminster
Press, 1960), III.11.6.725.
CHAPTER 5—WORK BECOMES FRUITLESS
86. Some have argued that Adamand Eve could have obeyed
out of self-interest because God told themthat if they
ate it they would die—but within the context of the
narrative they could not have been able to comprehend
what that meant.
87. This section assumes that when Adamand Eve turned
away fromGod, the human race sinned, and therefore
you and I sinned as well. Romans 5:12 tells us that “all
sinned” in the sin of Adam. This is counterintuitive to
our individualistic Western society (though, it should
be added, not to the rest of the world). One way
Christian theologians have explained this biblical
teaching is this: Adamwas especially made by God to
be our perfect representative. Therefore, we cannot
protest that if we had been there we would have acted
differently. Adamand Eve did exactly what we would
have done if we had been there—and also what we
continue to do in our own lives today. Thus we sinned
“in them.” See article on “Sin” in J.I. Packer and I.H.
Marshall, eds., The New Bible Dictionary, Third
Edition (Inter-Varsity Press, 1996), 1105ff.
88. WilliamButler Yeats, “The Second Coming” in Michael
Robartes and the Dancer (Kessinger Publishing, 2010),
19.
89. David Atkinson, The Message of Genesis 1–11: The Dawn
of Creation (Inter-Varsity, 1990), 87.
90. Alec Motyer, Look to the Rock: An Old Testament
Background to Our Understanding of Christ (InterVarsity Press, 1996), 118–9.
91. This is a big subject. See Timothy Keller and Kathy Keller,
The Meaning of Marriage: Facing the Complexities of
Commitment with the Wisdom of God (Dutton, 2011),
Chapter 6. Derek Kidner says that we see here in
Genesis chapter 3, verse 16: “Love has slipped fromthe
fully personal realmto that of instinctive urges passive
and active.” “To love and to cherish” becomes “to
desire and to dominate” (Derek Kidner, Genesis, 71).
92. Albert C. Wolters, Creation Regained: A Transforming
View of the World (Eerdmans, 1985), 44.
93. W.R. Forrester, Christian Vocation (Scribner, 1953), 129.
Quoted in Ibid.
94. “Work, Worker” in The Dictionary of Biblical Imagery,
eds. L. Ryken and T. Longman (Inter-Varsity Press,
1995), 966.
95. It should be observed that the real historical figures of
Salieri and Mozart are not identical to the characters
depicted in the play.
96. The script for Peter Shaffer’s play Amadeus can be found at
The Daily Script,
http://www.dailyscript.com/scripts/amadeus.xhtml
(retrieved May 16, 2012).
97. Froman interview with Sebastian Thrun in Andy Kessler,
“What’s Next for Silicon Valley?” The Wall Street
Journal, June 16–17, 2012.
98. Crouch, Culture-making, 188. See also David Brooks, “Sam
Spade at Starbucks,” The New York Times, April 12,
2012.
99. Isaac Watts, “Joy to the World.” In Isaac Watts, The
Psalms of David: Imitated in the Language of the New
Testament and Applied to the Christian State and
Worship (London: C. Corrall, 1818).
CHAPTER 6—WORK BECOMES POINTLESS
100. Tremper Longman, The Book of Ecclesiastes (Eerdmans,
1998), 15–20.
101. Tradition has it that the speaker in Ecclesiastes describing
his accrual of wisdom, money, and power is Solomon,
the king of Israel after his father, David. There are major
problems with this tradition, however, largely stemming
fromthe evidence in the book itself. In Ecclesiastes
chapter 1, verse 16 the speaker says, “I have increased
in wisdommore than anyone who has ruled Jerusalem
before me.” But only David ruled Israel fromJerusalem
before Solomon. It is highly unlikely that Solomon
would have said this. See discussion in Longman, Book
of Ecclesiastes, 2–9.
102. The Qoheleth character is not so much an atheist as a
secularist, for whomGod is vague and distant. But the
author of the book shows at the very end that he is a
man of faith who sees that life “under the sun” cannot
be all there is. Though there are no exact parallels to the
literary genre of Ecclesiastes in the Bible; the closest to
it is the book of Job. There, too, a character is
introduced in the beginning and evaluated at the end in
a positive and straightforward way. In the midst of the
book, the struggling central character says many
dubious and self-contradictory things.
103. Peter Shaffer, Amadeus, The Daily Script,
http://www.dailyscript.com/scripts/amadeus.xhtml
(retrieved May 16, 2012).
104. Michael A. Eaton, Ecclesiastes: An Introduction and
Commentary (Inter-Varsity Press, 1983), 101.
105. Hardy, Fabric of This World, 31. On pages 29–37, Hardy
gives a good overview and critique of Karl Marx’s
understanding of work.
106. Quoted in Ibid., 32.
107. See Peter Drucker, The Concept of the Corporation (John
Day, 1946); The Age of Discontinuity (Harper and Row,
1969); Post-Capitalist Society (HarperCollins, 1993).
108. Derek Kidner, A Time to Mourn and a Time to Dance
(Inter-Varsity Press, 1976), 47.
109. David Brooks, “The Service Patch,” The New York Times,
May 24, 2012.
110. Ibid.
111. John A. Bernbaumand Simon M. Steer, Why Work?
Careers and Employment in Biblical Perspective
(Baker, 1986), 70.
112. Dorothy Sayers, “Why Work?” in Creed or Chaos?
(Harcourt, Brace, 1949), 59.
113. Ibid., 60–62.
CHAPTER 7—WORK BECOMES SELFISH
114. Kidner, Genesis, 109.
115. Kidner, Genesis, 110.
116. C.S. Lewis, Mere Christianity (San Francisco: Harper,
2001), 122.
117. Quote taken fromthe recording of a sermon by Dick Lucas,
“Gen. 44-45: Story of Joseph Recalled and Applied: 4.
No Way but down to Egypt.” Originally preached at St.
Helens Bishopsgate, London, on Wednesday, July 26,
1989.
118. See Raymond J. Bakke, A Theology as Big as the City
(Inter-Varsity Press, 1997), Chapter 13: “The Persian
Partnership for the Rebuilding of Jerusalem,” 105ff.
119. Karen H. Jobes, Esther: The NIV Application Commentary
(Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan, 1999), 146.
CHAPTER 8—WORK REVEALS OUR IDOLS
120. Luc Ferry, A Brief History of Thought: A Philosophical
Guide to Living (Harper, 2011), 3–12.
121. Martin Luther, A Treatise Concerning Good Works (1520;
Kessinger Publishing Reprint, nd), X.XI.18–20.
122. See Timothy Keller, Counterfeit Gods: The Empty
Promises of Money, Sex, and Power, and the Only
Hope That Matters (Dutton, 2009). Most of the book is
dedicated to discerning personal and individual idols,
but parts of Chapters 5 and 6 touch on cultural,
corporate idols.
123. Andrew Delbanco, The Real American Dream: A
Meditation on Hope (Harvard, 1999), 3, 23, 91.
124. The survey of Nietzsche’s thought about idols and culture
is found in Ferry, Brief History of Thought, 144–8. See
Nietzsche, Twilight of the Idols, trans. Duncan Large
(Oxford, 1998).
125. Nietzsche, the father of postmodern deconstruction,
sought to outline a way of living that did not fall prey to
“idolatry,” but it is generally conceded that he did not.
Many have pointed out that Nietzsche’s relativismand
“philosophy of the hammer” are basically truth claims.
Ferry argues most convincingly that, in the name of
smashing “idols,” Nietzsche turns the real—the world
as it is—into something essentially sacred. See Ferry,
Brief History of Thought, 199–219.
126. Reinhold Niebuhr, The Nature and Destiny of Man, vol. 1,
Human Nature (Scribner, 1964), 189. “The lust for
power is prompted by a darkly conscious realization of
its insecurity.” See also “The most obvious forms of
idolatry are those in which the world of meaning is
organized around a center . . . such as the life of a tribe
or nation, which is patently contingent and not
ultimate” (165).
127. Steven Brull, “No Layoff Ideal Costs Japan Dearly,” The
New York Times, November 26, 1992,
http://www.nytimes.com/1992/11/26/business/worldbusiness/26labo.xhtml.
128. Ferry, Brief History of Thought, 145–6.
129. Philip Kitcher, “The Trouble with Scientism: Why History
and the Humanities Are Also a Formof Knowledge,”
The New Republic, May 4, 2012.
130. See Robert Bellah, Richard Madsen, WilliamM. Sullivan,
Ann Swidler, and Steven M. Tipton, Habits of the
Heart: Individualism and Commitment in American
Life (University of California Press, 1985).
131. Ferry, Brief History of Thought, 122.
132. Ibid., 126.
133. An example was Taylor’s “Science of Shoveling” case
study fromhis time at BethlehemIron Company (later
BethlehemSteel). When Taylor arrived, there were
almost sixhundred men shoveling coal, each having his
own shovel and method. After thousands of hours of
analysis, Taylor determined the most efficient shovel
shape and the most efficient method of shoveling. After
Taylor instituted these changes and tightly monitored
workers every minute, the number of shovelers was cut
by two-thirds, and the average number of tons
shoveled per day per man more than tripled. Frederick
W. Taylor, The Principles of Scientific Management
(Harper and Brothers, 1911), 66ff. Cited in Lee Hardy,
The Fabric of This World: Inquiries into Calling,
Career Choice, and the Design of Human Work
(Eerdmans, 1990), 132.
134. Quoted in Hardy, Fabric of This World, 139. See also the
article by Stephen P. Waring, “Peter Drucker, MBO, and
the Corporatist Critique of Scientific Management,”
Ohio State University Press,
https://ohiostatepress.org/Books/Complete%20PDFs/Nelson%2135. For an excellent, appreciative yet criticalsurvey of
Nietzsche’s thought and influence, see Ferry, Brief
History of Thought, Chapters 5–6, 143–219. The
following paragraphs are dependent on Ferry’s
treatment.
136. See Edward Docx, “PostmodernismIs Dead,” Prospect,
July 20, 2011,
http://www.prospectmagazine.co.uk/magazine/postmodernismis-dead-va-exhibition-age-of-authenticism.
137. Ferry, Brief History of Thought, 215–6.
138. Jacques Ellul, The Technological Society, trans. John Wilkinson (Alfred A. Knopf, 1964).
139. Delbanco, Real American Dream, 96–7, 102.
140. Ibid., 105.
141. See Wendell Berry, Sex, Economy, Freedom, and
Community: Eight Essays (Pantheon, 1994); WilliamT.
Cavanaugh, Being Consumed: Economics and
Christian Desire (Eerdmans, 2008); Richard A. Posner,
A Failure of Capitalism: The Crisis of ’08 and the
Descent into Depression (Harvard, 2009). Posner makes
the case against a major part of capitalist dogma,
namely, that markets are self-correcting. See also Bob
Goudzwaard, “The Ideology of Material Prosperity,”
Idols of Our Time (Inter-Varsity Press, 1984), 49ff.
142. Daniel Bell, The Cultural Contradictions of Capitalism:
20th Anniversary Edition (Basic Books, 1996).
143. Naomi Wolf, “This Global Financial Fraud and Its
Gatekeepers,” The Guardian, July 15, 2012,
http://www.guardian.co.uk/commentisfree/2012/jul/14/globalfinancial-fraud-gatekeepers.
144. Nicholas Wolterstorff, Justice: Rights and Wrongs
(Princeton University Press, 2010), 145.
145. Some readers will be interested to notice the connection
between these four ways of integrating faith and work
and the various theological “streams” that have shaped
the Christian view of work. Chapter 9, “A New Story for Work,” draws on the Reformed understanding of
distinct worldviews and life views. Chapter 10, “A New
Conception of Work,” draws on the Lutheran
appreciation of all human work as God’s means to care
for his creation and the human race. Chapter 12, “New
Power for Work,” accords with the conservative
evangelical focus on personalsalvation and spiritual
growth, while Chapter 11, “A New Compass for Work,”
aligns somewhat with the ecumenical-mainline emphasis
on ethical behavior in work, and especially on social
justice.
CHAPTER 9—A NEW STORY FOR WORK
146. Alasdair MacIntyre, After Virtue: A Study in Moral
Theory, 2nd ed. (University of Notre Dame Press, 1984),
210.
147. For an accessible yet scholarly overview of how stories
relate to worldview, see N.T. Wright, “Stories, Worldviews and Knowledge,” The New Testament and
the People of God (Fortress, 1992), 38–80. This material
is very profitable and should be consulted for a good
understanding of worldview and narrative in general,
and especially as worldview is conveyed in the Bible
through its narrative accounts.
148. Ibid.
149. A good introduction to the history of the concept and a
compelling argument for its usefulness is David K.
Naugle, Worldview: The History of a Concept
(Eerdmans, 2002). See also James W. Sire, Naming the
Elephant: Worldview as a Concept (Inter-Varsity Press,
2004). James K.A. Smith does not deny that we have
comprehensive perspectives through which we
interpret reality, and he heartily agrees they are in
narratival form, but he argues that most people
conceive of “worldview” today in terms that are too
cognitive. He argues that your worldview is not merely
a set of doctrinal and philosophical beliefs, which are
completely formed by reason and information. It also
comprises of a set of hopes and loves—“tacit”
knowledge and heart attitudes—which are not all
adopted consciously and deliberately. Worldview
formation then does not happen only through argument
or mainly through politics. Rather, it is the result of the
narratives we embrace, especially those that give us a
compelling and desirable picture of human flourishing
that captures our heart and imagination. Those
narratives are presented to us not only (or even mainly)
in classrooms but through the stories we see, hear, and
read fromvarious culturalsources. James K.A. Smith,
Desiring the Kingdom: Worship, Worldview, and
Cultural Formation (Baker, 2009). Smith, citing
Canadian philosopher Charles Taylor, proposes that the
term“social imaginaries” would be a better termthan
“worldviews.”
150. MacIntyre, After Virtue, 211, quoted in Wright, New
Testament, 38.
151. Leslie Stevenson, Seven Theories of Human Nature
(Oxford, 1974).
152. Ibid., 42.
153. Albert C. Wolters, Creation Regained: A Transforming
View of the World (Eerdmans, 1985), 50.
154. “Two Murdochs, Two Views,” The Wall Street Journal,
August 24, 2012.
155. See Jay Rosen, “JournalismIs Itself a Religion,”
Pressthink, January 7, 2004,
http://archive.pressthink.org/2004/01/07/press_religion.xhtml.
156. Andrew Delbanco, College: What It Was, Is, and Should
Be (Princeton University Press, 2012), 94–95.
157. C.S. Lewis, “Illustrations of the Tao,” in The Abolition of
Man (Collier, 1955), 7.
158. Andrew Delbanco, “A Smug Education?” The New York
Times, March 12, 2012,
http://www.nytimes.com/2012/03/09/opinion/collegesand-elitism.xhtml.
159. A classic deconstruction of the art world as essentially a
religious field with its own priesthood, doctrines, and
temples is TomWolfe’s short 1975 piece of social
criticism, The Painted Word (Bantam, 1975).
160. It is impossible to make a complete distinction between
psychological and sociological idols, since all idols
work on the heart, controlling us through fear and
desire. And an internal idolsuch as the over-desire for
human approval always works in close tandemwith the
idols of the culture. In traditional cultures the way to
human approval is different than in an individualistic, Western culture. (Indeed the same behaviors that win
approval in one culture are frowned upon in the other.)
Nevertheless, the psychological idols always work
intimately with sociological idols to forma unique “idol
complex” that blinds and controls us. For more on this
subject see Timothy Keller, Counterfeit Gods: The
Empty Promises of Money, Sex, and Power, and the
Only Hope That Matters (Dutton, 2009).
161. D. Martyn Lloyd-Jones, Healing and the Scriptures
(Thomas Nelson, 1982), 14.
162. The quotes fromdoctors are frompersonal
correspondence to the author.
163. Jerome Groopman, “God at the Bedside,” The New
England Journal of Medicine, vol. 350, no. 12, March
18, 2004, 1176–78.
164. Lloyd-Jones, Healing and the Scriptures, 50.
165. Christian Smith, What Is a Person? Rethinking Humanity,
Social Life, and the Moral Good from the Person Up
(University of Chicago Press, 2010), 203.
166. C. John Sommerville, The Decline of the Secular
University (Oxford, 2007), 69–70.
167. See Rodney Stark, For the Glory of God (Princeton
University Press, 2004); and Diogenes Allen, Christian
Belief in a Postmodern World: The Full Wealth of
Conviction (Westminster, 1989).
CHAPTER 10—A NEW CONCEPTION OF WORK
168. As noted previously, the worldview (work as creativity)
approach tends to follow the Reformed or Calvinistic
strand of the Protestant Reformation, while the
providential (work as love) approach tends to follow the
Lutheran. For a good overview, see Lee Hardy, The
Fabric of This World: Inquiries into Calling, Career
Choice, and the Design of Human Work (Eerdmans,
1990), Chapter 2, “Our Work, God’s Providence: The
Christians Concept of Vocation,” 44–78. Hardy outlines
the Lutheran, Calvinist, and modern Catholic views of
work.
169. Richard Mouw, He Shines in All That’s Fair: Culture and
Common Grace (Eerdmans, 2001), 14.
170. Frances Hutcheson, eighteenth-century moral
philosopher, used a famous illustration to demonstrate
this. He asks us to imagine that we hear of a man who
discovers buried treasure in his backyard—worth
millions. But then you hear that he gives it all away to
the poor. Even if you would never do so yourself, and
even if you swagger publicly that such an act is stupid,
you cannot help but admire what was done. There is an
indelible sense of the moral beauty of the action.
171. Alec Motyer, The Prophecy of Isaiah (Inter-Varsity Press,
1993), 235.
172. John Calvin, Institutes of the Christian Religion, ed. John
T. McNeill, trans. Ford Lewis Battles (Westminster
Press, 1960), II.2.15.
173. Ibid., II.2.12.
174. FromLeonard Bernstein’s The Joy of Music (Simon &
Schuster, 2004), 105.
175. Timothy Keller, Generous Justice: How God’s Grace
Makes Us Just (Dutton, 2010). See Chapter 7—“Doing
Justice in the Public Square,” pp. 148ff. See also Daniel
Strange, “Co-belligerence and common grace: Can the
enemy of my enemy be my friend?” Cambridge Papers,
vol. 14, no. 3, September 2005, http://www.jubileecentre.org/document.php?id=48
176. This case study is heavily based on Ted Turnau,
“Reflecting Theologically on Popular Culture as
Meaningful,” Calvin Theological Journal 37 (2002),
270–96. We will not go into the differences between
popular culture and so-called “high” culture that
Turnau explores.
177. For an excellent survey and practical description of these
basic approaches to culture, see Andy Crouch, Culture
Making: Recovering our Creative Calling (InterVarsity, 2008), Chapter 5, “Gestures and Postures,” 78ff.
178. What does this “humble, critical” engagement look like?
See Timothy Keller, Center Church: Doing Balanced,
Gospel-Centered Ministry in Your City (Zondervan,
2012), Part 5, “Cultural Engagement,” 181ff. Also see
James D. Hunter, To Change the World: The Irony,
Tragedy, and Possibility of Christianity in Late
Modernity (Oxford, 2010.)
179. R.C. Zaehner, quoted by Steve Turner, Hungry for
Heaven: Rock ’n’ Roll and the Search for Redemption
(Inter-Varsity Press, 1995), 1.
180. Turnau, “Reflecting Theologically,” 279.
CHAPTER 11—A NEW COMPASS FOR WORK
181. Sheelah Kolhatkar, “Trading Down,” The New York Times,
July 5, 2009.
182. “Forswearing Greed,” The Economist, June 6, 2009, 66.
183. Fred Catherwood, Light, Salt, and the World of Business:
Why We Must Stand Against Corruption (International
Fellowship of Evangelical Students, 2007).
184. “Why Was Transparency International Founded?”
Transparency International,
http://www.transparency.org/whoweare/organisation/faqs_on_t185. Catherwood, Light, Salt, and the World of Business, 20.
186. Paul Batchelor and Steve Osei-Mensah, “Salt and Light:
Christians’ Role in Combating Corruption,” Lausanne
Global Conversation,
http://conversation.lausanne.org/en/conversations/detail/12129187. See Meera Selva, “UK Politicians: Banking SystemIs
Corrupt,” Seattle Times, June 30, 2012,
http://seattletimes.nwsource.com/html/businesstechnology/2018188. Hugh Heclo, On Thinking Institutionally (Oxford
University Press, 2011).
189. Bruce K. Waltke, The Book of Proverbs: Chapters 1–15
(Eerdmans, 2004), 96. My book Generous Justice
(Dutton, 2010) expands on this concept.
190. See Lewis, Abolition, 95–121. Lewis lists eight traits that
were universally recognized among ancient cultures,
whether Northern European pagan, Greek and Roman,
Egyptian, Jewish, Confucian, Buddhist, or Christian.
These traits were general “beneficence” (namely,
treating your neighbor as you want your neighbor to
treat you); special beneficence (loyalty and love to
one’s own people, group, and nation); love and respect
for one’s parents and ancestors, care and concern for
one’s children and posterity; “justice” (including sexual
faithfulness to one’s spouse, truth telling, and equitable
treatment of all parties in court); keeping promises;
mercy to the poor and weak; and finally “greatheartedness,” namely, courage, self-discipline, and
honor. As we willsee in the rest of this chapter, the
Christian “theological virtues” are largely missing. While ancient cultures required mercy for the poor and
weak, it was not grounded in the teaching that every
person was made in the image of God and therefore had
a right to proper treatment. Rather, merciful behavior
was seen as something that an honorable person did. In
other words, mercy was something that was done for
your own happiness and honor, not the poor person’s.
See how Augustine brought Christian doctrine to bear
on ethics and changed the older pagan understanding
of why and how to treat people weaker than you, in
Nicholas Wolterstorff, “Augustine’s Break with
Eudaimonism,” Justice: Rights and Wrongs (Princeton
University Press, 2010), 180–207.
191. Thomas Aquinas, Summa Theologica, II.1.61. There are
many versions available, including online versions. For
example, see New Advent,
http://www.newadvent.org/summa/2061.htm.
192. Luc Ferry, A Brief History of Thought: A Philosophical
Guide to Living (HarperCollins, 2011), 58–9.
193. Ibid., 60.
194. For the most developed exposition of this understanding
of why God created the world, see Jonathan Edwards’s
treatise “Concerning the End for Which God Created
the World,” in The Works of Jonathan Edwards:
Ethical Writings, vol. 8, ed. Paul Ramsey (Yale
University Press, 1989).
195. Ibid., 58.
196. Aristotle, Politics, I.V. The quote is fromthe translation of
Benjamin Jowett (Dover Thrift Edition, 2000), 12.
197. John Calvin, Institutes of the Christian Religion, ed. John
T. McNeill, trans. Ford Lewis Battles (Westminster
Press, 1960), III.4.6.696–7. Here is the longer citation:
“The great part of [men] are most unworthy if they be
judged by their own merit. But here Scripture helps in
the best way when it teaches that we are not to
consider that men merit of themselves but to look upon
the image of God in all men, to which we owe all honor
and love. [You] say, ‘he is contemptible and worthless’;
but the Lord shows himto be one to whomhe has
given the beauty of his image. Say that you owe
nothing for any service of his; but God, as it were, has
put himin his own place in order that you may
recognize toward himthe many and great benefits with
which God has bound you to himself. Say that he does
not deserve even your least effort for your sake; but the
image of God, which recommends himto you, is worthy
of your giving yourself and all your possessions. . . .
You willsay, ‘He has deserved something far different
of me.’ Yet what has the Lord deserved? . . . remember
not to consider men’s evil intention but . . . look upon
the image of God in them, which . . . with its beauty and
dignity allures us to love and embrace them.”
198. The main book is Brian Tierney, The Idea of Natural
Rights: Studies on Natural Rights, Natural Law and
Church Law 1150–1625 (Scholars Press, 1997). Also
see Tierney, “The Idea of Natural Rights—Origins and
Persistence,” Northwestern Journal of International
Human Rights, vol. 2, Spring 2004.
199. While it is obvious that nonbelievers in God can believe in
human rights and work very passionately for justice—
indeed, this fits in with the Christian understanding of
common grace—it is another thing to hold that their
belief in human rights is intellectually warranted. Most
secular people essentially share the beliefs of many of
the older Greek and Roman thinkers, namely, that we
sprung froman impersonal cosmos and after death our
matter will go back to an undifferentiated, unconscious,
impersonalstate. Yet secular governments and
institutions do not return to the more logically
consistent position that the ancients had and instead
continue to hold to the inviolable dignity and value of
each human individual. There is nothing that says they
are not allowed to do so, and fromany point of view,
society will be better if they do not return to the older
way of conceiving of human life. But such beliefs in
human rights are an enormous leap of faith away from
their own worldview’s understanding of human nature,
for belief in human rights makes far more sense if there
is a God than if there is not. Nicholas Wolterstorff
makes this case in “Is a Secular Grounding of Human
Rights Possible?” and “A Theistic Grounding of Human
Rights,” chapters 15 and 16 in his book Justice: Rights
and Wrongs. Also see Christian Smith, “Does
NaturalismWarrant a Moral Belief in Universal
Benevolence and Human Rights?” in The Believing
Primate: Scientific, Philosophical, and Theological
Reflections on the Origin of Religion, eds. J. Schloss
and M. Murray (Oxford, 2009), 292–317. So while
millions of nonreligious people believe in human dignity
and human rights, such belief is essentially religious in
nature.
200. I have combined the NIVand KJVversions in the quoted
passage, as I prefer the way the latter translation
handles verse 16.
201. The modern reader winces at the words “slaves” (verse 5)
and “masters” (verse 9) largely because we immediately
think only of the modern African slave trade, in which
slavery was race-based, lifelong, and based on
kidnapping. However, in the ancient world there were
many “slaveries.” There is good evidence that much of
slavery was very harsh and brutal, but there is also lots
of evidence that many slaves were not treated like
African slaves would be, but lived normal lives and
were paid the going wage, but were not allowed to quit
or change employers, and were in slavery an average of
ten years. Prisoners of war often became slaves, and
men could be sentenced to being galley slaves for
crimes. A person could become a slave for a set period
of time in order to work off debts, because there was no
such thing as bankruptcy in ancient times. Often the
result was an indentured servanthood for years until
the debts were paid. To our surprise, slaves could own
slaves, and many slaves were doctors, professors,
administrators, and civilservants. (See Andrew T.
Lincoln’s discussion of ancient slavery Word Biblical
Commentary: Ephesians [Word, 1990] in his Word
commentary on Ephesians, 415–20.) In his survey,
Lincoln says that no one in ancient times could
conceive of an economic or labor structure without it. While there were brutal forms of slavery, the concept—
indentured labor in which the laborer was not free to
market his skills to other employers—was considered a
given. Quoting another scholar, he writes that this was
so accepted, “one cannot correctly speak of the slave
‘problem’ in antiquity” (Lincoln quoting Westerman,
415.) In other words, no one—not even slaves—
thought the whole institution should be abolished. This
is why Paul’s letters do not aimat abolishing slavery
but rather aimto transformthe variegated ancient
institution fromthe inside. As the scholar F.F. Bruce
says about Paul’s brief statements about the equality of
slaves and masters in the first book of Corinthians,
Galatians, Ephesians, Colossians, and Philemon, “What
[Paul’s letters] do is to bring us into an atmosphere in
which the institution of slavery could only wilt and die”
(F.F. Bruce, Paul: Apostle of the Heart Set Free
[Eerdmans, 1977], 407). That is quite right. Slavery was
an accepted institution in all cultures and societies of
the world fromtime immemorial. Only within Christianity
did the idea eventually arise that slavery was an
abominable institution to be abolished. Why? Largely
because of the implications of the gospel, laid out by
Paul. All Christians are “slaves” of Christ, who himself
came as a doulos, or servant (Philippians 2:7). Paul
regularly told Christian slave owners that their slaves
were equal to themin the sight of God and had to be
treated as brothers (1 Corinthians 7:22–23). In Galatians
chapter 3, verses 26–29, he writes that in Christ there is
no slave or free—again, all are equal. The case study in
which he applies this gospel theology is the book of
Philemon. There Paulsends Onesimus, a Christian
slave, back to his Christian master, Philemon. Philemon
is told that Onesimus is his beloved brother in the Lord
and a fellow man. In Miroslav Volf’s book Public
Faith: How Followers of Christ Should Serve the
Common Good (Brazos, 2011), he says that this kind of
teaching so transforms the master-servant relationship
that, while it is still there in form—the servant is still to
work for his employer—“slavery has been abolished
even if its outer institutionalshell remains . . .” (p. 92).
This of course undermined and weakened the
institution of slavery among Christians very quickly, so
that it was “emptied of its inner content” until
eventually it was discarded. Later, the institution of
race-based, kidnapping-fueled slavery in the New World was so out of accord with biblical principles that
Christians led the fight to have slavery abolished.
Despite how complicated this subject is, it is important
for Christians today to think it out. Many critics of
Christianity simply assume that the Bible wrongly
endorsed slavery and that therefore it may be wrong
about other things it teaches. Actually, biblical
theology destroyed the coercive heart of the institution
of slavery within the Christian community and finally
led Christians to abolish the inevitably oppressionprone institution itself. For more on how Christianity
gave the world the idea that slavery was wrong, see
Rodney Stark, For the Glory of God (Princeton
University Press, 2003), Chapter 4, “God’s Justice.” In
sum, when Paulspeaks to Christians in Ephesians 6, he
is not denouncing the institution of slavery per se
(which would have been useless in imperial Rome). He
is speaking directly to individual Christians within the
institution about how to conduct themselves, and what
he says is quite revolutionary.
202. P.T. O’Brien, The Letter to the Ephesians, Pillar New
Testament Commentary (Grand Rapids, MI: Eerdmans,
1999), 454.
203. At the time Jesus was speaking, moths and vermin were a
great danger, since garments were a major part of one’s
wealth; fashion changed little and clothing was often
passed on to others—and, of course, human “thieves”
are always out to take away the things we love most.
204. See Jonathan Rushworth and Michael Schluter,
Transforming Capitalism from Within: A Relational
Approach to the Purpose, Performance, and
Assessment of Companies (Relationships Global, 2011).
205. Arlie Hochschild, The Outsourced Self: Intimate Life in
Market Times (Metropolitan Books, 2012).
206. Some good places to start: On capitalism: Bob
Goudzwaard, Capitalism and Progress: A Diagnosis of
Western Society (Paternoster Press, 1997); John
Medaille, The Vocation of Business: Social Justice in
the Marketplace (ContinuumBooks, 2007). On
business decisions:Jeff Van Duzer, “How Then Should
We Do Business?” in Why Business Matters to God:
And What Still Needs to Be Fixed (Inter-Varsity Press,
2010); Lee Hardy, “Part Two: Applications,” The Fabric
of This World: Inquiries into Calling, Career Choice,
and the Design of Human Work (Eerdmans, 1990); see
also Rushworth and Schluter, Transforming Capitalism
from Within. In general: Michael Goheen and Craig
Bartholomew, “Life at the Crossroads: Perspectives on
Some Areas of Public Life,” Living at the Crossroads:
An Introduction to Christian Worldview (Baker, 2008).
CHAPTER 12—NEW POWER FOR WORK
207. Dr. Ann, “I Do, Therefore I Am! Aren’t I?,” Crosswalk,
recounted at
http://christiannewsrssfeed.blogspot.com/2012/06/crosswalki-do-therefore-i-am-arent-i.xhtml.
208. Dorothy Sayers, Creed or Chaos? (Harcourt Brace, 1949),
81.
209. Ibid., 81–2.
210. C.S. Lewis, Mere Christianity (San Francisco: Harper,
2001), 226.
211. I should add that, while Eric Liddell was a Christian and
Protestant missionary, John Coltrane’s faith is not
easily defined and some claimit was not specifically
Christian. I amin no place to pass judgment one way or
the other. Nevertheless, the connection that he
expresses between God’s love, our faith, and work is
vivid and right.
EPILOGUE: LEADING PEOPLE TO INTEGRATE FAITH AND WORK
212. Quote fromKuyper’s inaugural address at the dedication
of the Free University. Found in Abraham Kuyper: A
Centennial Reader, ed. James D. Bratt (Eerdmans,
1998), 488.
213. “Reflections on Work: A Survey,” Redeemer Report
(church newsletter, no longer available), January 2004.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Katherine and I get our names on the cover of this book,
but the quarterback of our teamhas been Scott Kauffmann,
whose guidance and extensive editorial work has been crucial
to bringing this book into existence. His long experience in the
business world, his theological acumen, as well as his skill with
words, all beautifully prepared himto lead us in crafting this
work together. If you are finding the book helpful to you—
thank him. As always, I amgrateful to David McCormick and
Brian Tart, whose editorialsupport continue to make
Redeemer’s growing literary production possible.
I also must acknowledge the impact of two particular
friendships on my understanding of this subject. Mike
Bontrager and Don Flow are two Christians in the business
world who have embodied for me the faithful and joyful
integration of gospel faith with their daily work. My job is to
expound the Scripture and to make disciples, but without their
examples—and their ability to disciple me—I would not have
grasped as well much of the Bible’s teaching about vocation.
Finally, I want to thank those to whomthe book is
dedicated—the staff and lay leaders of Redeemer’s Center for
Faith & Work—for living out the struggles and thinking
through the implications of integrating your faith with your
work. Because you are doing it, we can write about it. Under
Katherine’s leadership, the CFW staff—Kenyon Adams, Chris
Dolan, Calvin Chin, Maria Fee, David Kim, and Amilee Watkins
—have not just read and learned, discussed and applied,
developed and taught a theology of work as outlined in these
chapters. They have been willing to live it out together as they
work—meaning they have looked at their own motivations,
they have applied the gospel to their own hearts and seen it
change them, and they have worked out of the joy that comes
froma richer biblical appreciation of work. Our lay leaders, out
there in the thorns and thistles of their vocations and
industries, are wrestling with God over their own motivations
and desires to see glimpses of himat work. They are being
transparent to help others grow in their knowledge and
practice. We commend you: Because you are doing it, you give
evidence of the gospel—the good news of the coming
kingdomof God—to the city in which God has placed you.
ABOUT THE AUTHORS
Timothy Keller was born and raised in Pennsylvania and
educated at Bucknell University, Gordon-Conwell Theological
Seminary, and Westminster Theological Seminary. He was first
a pastor in Hopewell, Virginia. In 1989 he started Redeemer
Presbyterian Church, in New York City, with his wife, Kathy,
and their three sons. Today, Redeemer has more than five
thousand regular Sunday attendees and has helped to start
nearly two hundred new churches around the world. Also the
author of The Meaning of Marriage, Generous Justice,
Counterfeit Gods, The Prodigal God, King’s Cross, and The
Reason for God, Timothy Keller lives in New York City with his
family.
Katherine Leary Alsdorf worked for twenty-five years in the
high-tech industry as an economic analyst and in various
executive leadership positions. After her CEO roles at One
Touch Systems and Pensare, Redeemer Presbyterian Church
recruited Katherine to lead the church’s efforts in marketplace
ministry, now called the Center for Faith & Work, which has
grown to serve more than two thousand people a year.
Katherine has served on the boards of International Arts
Movement, Fellowship for the Performing Arts, and the
Theology of Work project.
The Redeemer imprint is dedicated to books that address
pressing spiritual and social issues of the day in a way that
speaks both to the core Christian audience and to seekers and
skeptics alike. The mission for the Redeemer imprint is to bring
the power of the Christian gospel to every part of life. The
name comes fromRedeemer Presbyterian Church in New York
City, which TimKeller started in 1989 with his wife, Kathy, and
their three sons. Redeemer has begun a movement of
contextualized urban ministry, thoughtful preaching, and
church planting across America and throughout major world
cities.
VISIT PENGUIN.COM
Looking for more about
the book you just read?
Need help finding your
next great read?
Visit
PENGUIN.COM/WELCOME
for book recommendations,
reading group guides, videos,
author interviews and more.
PENGUIN.COM/WELCOME