Richard H. Thaler
Cass R. Sunstein
NudgeImproving Decisions
About Health, Wealth,
and Happiness
NUDGE
This page intentionally left blank
NUDGE
Improving Decisions About
Health, Wealth, and Happiness
Richard H. Thaler
Cass R. Sunstein
Yale University Press
New Haven & London
A Caravan book. For more information, visit
www.caravanbooks.org.
Copyright © 2008 by Richard H. Thaler and Cass R. Sunstein.
All rights reserved.
This book may not be reproduced, in whole or in part, including
illustrations, in any form (beyond that copying permitted by
Sections 107 and 108 of the U.S. Copyright Law and except by
reviewers for the public press), without written permission from
the publishers.
Set in Galliard and Copperplate 33 types by The Composing Room
of Michigan, Inc.
Printed in the United States of America.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Thaler, Richard H., 1945–
Nudge : improving decisions about health, wealth, and
happiness / Richard H. Thaler and Cass R. Sunstein.
p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-0-300-12223-7 (cloth : alk. paper) 1. Economics—
Psychological aspects. 2. Choice (Psychology)—Economic
aspects. 3. Decision making—Psychological aspects.
4. Consumer behavior. I. Sunstein, Cass R. II. Title.

Acknowledgments ix
Introduction 1
PART I HUMANS AND ECONS
1 Biases and Blunders 17
2 Resisting Temptation 40
3 Following the Herd 53
4 When Do We Need a Nudge? 72
5 Choice Architecture 81
PART II MONEY
6 Save More Tomorrow 103
7 Naïve Investing 118
8 Credit Markets 132
9 Privatizing Social Security: Smorgasbord Style 145
PART III HEALTH
10 Prescription Drugs: Part D for Daunting 159
11 How to Increase Organ Donations 175
12 Saving the Planet 183
PART IV FREEDOM
13 Improving School Choices 199
14 Should Patients Be Forced to Buy Lottery Tickets? 207
15 Privatizing Marriage 215
PART V EXTENSIONS AND OBJECTIONS
16 A Dozen Nudges 229
17 Objections 236
18 The Real Third Way 252
Notes 255
Bibliography 263
Index 283
V
4 INTRODUCTION
*Please do not confuse nudge with noodge. As William Safire has explained in his
“On Language” column in the New York Times Magazine (October 8, 2000), the
“Yiddishism noodge” is “a noun meaning ‘pest, annoying nag, persistent complainer.’
. . . To nudge is ‘to push mildly or poke gently in the ribs, especially with the elbow.’
One who nudges in that manner—‘to alert, remind, or mildly warn another’—is a far
geshrei from a noodge with his incessant, bothersome whining.” Nudge rhymes with
judge, while the oo sound in noodge is pronounced as in book.
While we are all down here, a small note about the reading architecture of this book
when it comes to footnotes and references. Footnotes such as this one that we deem
worth reading are keyed with a symbol and placed at the bottom of the page, so that
they are easy to find. We have aimed to keep these to a minimum. Numbered endnotes
contain information about source material. These can be skipped by all but the most
scholarly of readers. When the authors of cited material are mentioned in the text, we
sometimes add a date in parentheses—Smith (1982), for example—to enable readers
to go directly to the bibliography without having first to find the endnote.
1, then we welcome you to our new movement: libertarian paternalism.
We are keenly aware that this term is not one that readers will find immediately endearing. Both words are somewhat off-putting, weighted down
by stereotypes from popular culture and politics that make them unappealing to many. Even worse, the concepts seem to be contradictory. Why
combine two reviled and contradictory concepts? We argue that if the
terms are properly understood, both concepts reflect common sense—and
they are far more attractive together than alone. The problem with the
terms is that they have been captured by dogmatists.
The libertarian aspect of our strategies lies in the straightforward insistence that, in general, people should be free to do what they like—and to
opt out of undesirable arrangements if they want to do so. To borrow a
phrase from the late Milton Friedman, libertarian paternalists urge that
people should be “free to choose.”2 We strive to design policies that maintain or increase freedom of choice. When we use the term libertarian to
modify the word paternalism, we simply mean liberty-preserving. And
when we say liberty-preserving, we really mean it. Libertarian paternalists
want to make it easy for people to go their own way; they do not want to
burden those who want to exercise their freedom.
The paternalistic aspect lies in the claim that it is legitimate for choice architects to try to influence people’s behavior in order to make their lives
longer, healthier, and better. In other words, we argue for self-conscious
efforts, by institutions in the private sector and also by government, to
steer people’s choices in directions that will improve their lives. In our understanding, a policy is “paternalistic” if it tries to influence choices in a
way that will make choosers better off, as judged by themselves.3 Drawing
on some well-established findings in social science, we show that in many
cases, individuals make pretty bad decisions—decisions they would not
have made if they had paid full attention and possessed complete information, unlimited cognitive abilities, and complete self-control.
Libertarian paternalism is a relatively weak, soft, and nonintrusive type
of paternalism because choices are not blocked, fenced off, or significantly
burdened. If people want to smoke cigarettes, to eat a lot of candy, to
choose an unsuitable health care plan, or to fail to save for retirement, libertarian paternalists will not force them to do otherwise—or even make
things hard for them. Still, the approach we recommend does count as paINTRODUCTION 5
ternalistic, because private and public choice architects are not merely trying to track or to implement people’s anticipated choices. Rather, they are
self-consciously attempting to move people in directions that will make
their lives better. They nudge.
A nudge, as we will use the term, is any aspect of the choice architecture
that alters people’s behavior in a predictable way without forbidding any
options or significantly changing their economic incentives. To count as a
mere nudge, the intervention must be easy and cheap to avoid. Nudges are
not mandates. Putting the fruit at eye level counts as a nudge. Banning
junk food does not.
Many of the policies we recommend can and have been implemented by
the private sector (with or without a nudge from the government). Employers, for example, are important choice architects in many of the examples we discuss in this book. In areas involving health care and retirement
plans, we think that employers can give employees some helpful nudges.
Private companies that want to make money, and to do good, can even
benefit from environmental nudges, helping to reduce air pollution (and
the emission of greenhouse gases). But as we shall show, the same points
that justify libertarian paternalism on the part of private institutions apply
to government as well.
Humans and Econs: Why Nudges Can Help
Those who reject paternalism often claim that human beings do a
terrific job of making choices, and if not terrific, certainly better than anyone else would do (especially if that someone else works for the government). Whether or not they have ever studied economics, many people
seem at least implicitly committed to the idea of homo economicus, or economic man—the notion that each of us thinks and chooses unfailingly
well, and thus fits within the textbook picture of human beings offered by
economists.
If you look at economics textbooks, you will learn that homo economicus can think like Albert Einstein, store as much memory as ibm’s Big
Blue, and exercise the willpower of Mahatma Gandhi. Really. But the folks
that we know are not like that. Real people have trouble with long division
if they don’t have a calculator, sometimes forget their spouse’s birthday,
6 INTRODUCTION
and have a hangover on New Year’s Day. They are not homo economicus;
they are homo sapiens. To keep our Latin usage to a minimum we will
hereafter refer to these imaginary and real species as Econs and Humans.
Consider the issue of obesity. Rates of obesity in the United States are
now approaching 20 percent, and more than 60 percent of Americans are
considered either obese or overweight. There is overwhelming evidence
that obesity increases risks of heart disease and diabetes, frequently leading
to premature death. It would be quite fantastic to suggest that everyone is
choosing the right diet, or a diet that is preferable to what might be produced with a few nudges.
Of course, sensible people care about the taste of food, not simply about
health, and eating is a source of pleasure in and of itself. We do not claim
that everyone who is overweight is necessarily failing to act rationally, but
we do reject the claim that all or almost all Americans are choosing their
diet optimally. What is true for diets is true for other risk-related behavior,
including smoking and drinking, which produce more than five hundred
thousand premature deaths each year. With respect to diet, smoking, and
drinking, people’s current choices cannot reasonably be claimed to be
the best means of promoting their well-being. Indeed, many smokers,
drinkers, and overeaters are willing to pay third parties to help them make
better decisions.
But our basic source of information here is the emerging science of
choice, consisting of careful research by social scientists over the past four
decades. That research has raised serious questions about the rationality of
many judgments and decisions that people make. To qualify as Econs, people are not required to make perfect forecasts (that would require omniscience), but they are required to make unbiased forecasts. That is, the
forecasts can be wrong, but they can’t be systematically wrong in a predictable direction. Unlike Econs, Humans predictably err. Take, for example, the “planning fallacy”—the systematic tendency toward unrealistic
optimism about the time it takes to complete projects. It will come as no
surprise to anyone who has ever hired a contractor to learn that everything
takes longer than you think, even if you know about the planning fallacy.
Hundreds of studies confirm that human forecasts are flawed and biased. Human decision making is not so great either. Again to take just one
example, consider what is called the “status quo bias,” a fancy name for inINTRODUCTION 7
ertia. For a host of reasons, which we shall explore, people have a strong
tendency to go along with the status quo or default option.
When you get a new cell phone, for example, you have a series of choices
to make. The fancier the phone, the more of these choices you face, from
the background to the ring sound to the number of times the phone rings
before the caller is sent to voice mail. The manufacturer has picked one option as the default for each of these choices. Research shows that whatever
the default choices are, many people stick with them, even when the stakes
are much higher than choosing the noise your phone makes when it rings.
Two important lessons can be drawn from this research. First, never underestimate the power of inertia. Second, that power can be harnessed. If
private companies or public officials think that one policy produces better
outcomes, they can greatly influence the outcome by choosing it as the default. As we will show, setting default options, and other similar seemingly
trivial menu-changing strategies, can have huge effects on outcomes, from
increasing savings to improving health care to providing organs for lifesaving transplant operations.
The effects of well-chosen default options provide just one illustration
of the gentle power of nudges. In accordance with our definition, a nudge
is any factor that significantly alters the behavior of Humans, even though
it would be ignored by Econs. Econs respond primarily to incentives. If
the government taxes candy, they will buy less candy, but they are not influenced by such “irrelevant” factors as the order in which options are displayed. Humans respond to incentives too, but they are also influenced by
nudges.* By properly deploying both incentives and nudges, we can improve our ability to improve people’s lives, and help solve many of society’s
major problems. And we can do so while still insisting on everyone’s freedom to choose.
8 INTRODUCTION
*Alert readers will notice that incentives can come in different forms. If steps are
taken to increase people’s cognitive effort—as by placing fruit at eye level and candy in
a more obscure place—it might be said that the “cost” of choosing candy is increased.
Some of our nudges do, in a sense, impose cognitive (rather than material) costs, and in
that sense alter incentives. Nudges count as such, and qualify as libertarian paternalism,
only if any costs are low.
A False Assumption and Two Misconceptions
Many people who favor freedom of choice reject any kind of paternalism. They want the government to let citizens choose for themselves. The standard policy advice that stems from this way of thinking is to
give people as many choices as possible, and then let them choose the one
they like best (with as little government intervention or nudging as possible). The beauty of this way of thinking is that it offers a simple solution to
many complex problems: Just Maximize (the number and variety of)
Choices—full stop! The policy has been pushed in many domains, from
education to prescription drug insurance plans. In some circles, Just Maximize Choices has become a policy mantra. Sometimes the only alternative
to this mantra is thought to be a government mandate which is derided as
“One Size Fits All.” Those who favor Just Maximize Choices don’t realize
there is plenty of room between their policy and a single mandate. They
oppose paternalism, or think they do, and they are skeptical about nudges.
We believe that their skepticism is based on a false assumption and two
misconceptions.
The false assumption is that almost all people, almost all of the time,
make choices that are in their best interest or at the very least are better
than the choices that would be made by someone else. We claim that this
assumption is false—indeed, obviously false. In fact, we do not think that
anyone believes it on reflection.
Suppose that a chess novice were to play against an experienced player.
Predictably, the novice would lose precisely because he made inferior
choices—choices that could easily be improved by some helpful hints. In
many areas, ordinary consumers are novices, interacting in a world inhabited by experienced professionals trying to sell them things. More generally, how well people choose is an empirical question, one whose answer is
likely to vary across domains. It seems reasonable to say that people make
good choices in contexts in which they have experience, good information, and prompt feedback—say, choosing among ice cream flavors. People know whether they like chocolate, vanilla, coffee, licorice, or something else. They do less well in contexts in which they are inexperienced
and poorly informed, and in which feedback is slow or infrequent—say, in
choosing between fruit and ice cream (where the long-term effects are
INTRODUCTION 9
slow and feedback is poor) or in choosing among medical treatments or investment options. If you are given fifty prescription drug plans, with multiple and varying features, you might benefit from a little help. So long as
people are not choosing perfectly, some changes in the choice architecture
could make their lives go better (as judged by their own preferences, not
those of some bureaucrat). As we will try to show, it is not only possible to
design choice architecture to make people better off; in many cases it is
easy to do so.
The first misconception is that it is possible to avoid influencing people’s
choices. In many situations, some organization or agent must make a
choice that will affect the behavior of some other people. There is, in those
situations, no way of avoiding nudging in some direction, and whether intended or not, these nudges will affect what people choose. As illustrated
by the example of Carolyn’s cafeterias, people’s choices are pervasively influenced by the design elements selected by choice architects. It is true, of
course, that some nudges are unintentional; employers may decide (say)
whether to pay employees monthly or biweekly without intending to create any kind of nudge, but they might be surprised to discover that people
save more if they get paid biweekly because twice a year they get three pay
checks in one month. It is also true that private and public institutions can
strive for one or another kind of neutrality—as, for example, by choosing
randomly, or by trying to figure out what most people want. But unintentional nudges can have major effects, and in some contexts, these forms of
neutrality are unattractive; we shall encounter many examples.
Some people will happily accept this point for private institutions but
strenuously object to government efforts to influence choice with the goal
of improving people’s lives. They worry that governments cannot be
trusted to be competent or benign. They fear that elected officials and bureaucrats will place their own interests first, or pay attention to the narrow
goals of self-interested private groups. We share these concerns. In particular, we emphatically agree that for government, the risks of mistake, bias,
and overreaching are real and sometimes serious. We favor nudges over
commands, requirements, and prohibitions in part for that reason. But
governments, no less than cafeterias (which governments frequently run),
have to provide starting points of one or another kind. This is not avoidable. As we shall emphasize, they do so every day through the rules they
10 INTRODUCTION
set, in ways that inevitably affect some choices and outcomes. In this respect, the antinudge position is unhelpful—a literal nonstarter.
The second misconception is that paternalism always involves coercion.
In the cafeteria example, the choice of the order in which to present food
items does not force a particular diet on anyone, yet Carolyn, and others in
her position, might select some arrangement of food on grounds that are
paternalistic in the sense that we use the term. Would anyone object to
putting the fruit and salad before the desserts at an elementary school
cafeteria if the result were to induce kids to eat more apples and fewer
Twinkies? Is this question fundamentally different if the customers are
teenagers, or even adults? Since no coercion is involved, we think that
some types of paternalism should be acceptable even to those who most
embrace freedom of choice.
In domains as varied as savings, organ donations, marriage, and health
care, we will offer specific suggestions in keeping with our general approach. And by insisting that choices remain unrestricted, we think that
the risks of inept or even corrupt designs are reduced. Freedom to choose
is the best safeguard against bad choice architecture.
Choice Architecture in Action
Choice architects can make major improvements to the lives of
others by designing user-friendly environments. Many of the most successful companies have helped people, or succeeded in the marketplace,
for exactly that reason. Sometimes the choice architecture is highly visible,
and consumers and employers are much pleased by it. (The iPod and the
iPhone are good examples because not only are they elegantly styled, but
it is also easy for the user to get the devices to do what they want.) Sometimes the architecture is taken for granted and could benefit from some
careful attention.
Consider an illustration from our own employer, the University of Chicago. The university, like many large employers, has an “open enrollment”
period every November, when employees are allowed to revise the selections they have made about such benefits as health insurance and retirement savings. Employees are required to make their choices online. (Public computers are available for those who would otherwise not have
INTRODUCTION 11
Internet access.) Employees receive, by mail, a package of materials explaining the choices they have and instructions on how to log on to make
these choices. Employees also receive both paper and email reminders.
Because employees are human, some neglect to log on, so it is crucial to
decide what the default options are for these busy and absent-minded employees. To simplify, suppose there are two alternatives to consider: those
who make no active choice can be given the same choice they made the
previous year, or their choice can be set back to “zero.” Suppose that last
year an employee, Janet, contributed one thousand dollars to her retirement plan. If Janet makes no active choice for the new year, one alternative
would be to default her to a one thousand–dollar contribution; another
would be to default her to zero contribution. Call these the “status quo”
and “back to zero” options. How should the choice architect choose between these defaults?
Libertarian paternalists would like to set the default by asking what
reflective employees in Janet’s position would actually want. Although this
principle may not always lead to a clear choice, it is certainly better than
choosing the default at random, or making either “status quo” or “back to
zero” the default for everything. For example, it is a good guess that most
employees would not want to cancel their heavily subsidized health insurance. So for health insurance the status quo default (same plan as last year)
seems strongly preferred to the back to zero default (which would mean
going without health insurance).
Compare this to the employee’s “flexible spending account,” in which
an employee sets aside money each month that can be used to pay for certain expenditures (such as uninsured medical or child care expenses).
Money put into this account has to be spent each year or it is lost, and the
predicted expenditures might vary greatly from one year to the next (for
example, child care expenses go down when a child enters school). In this
case, the zero default probably makes more sense than the status quo.
This problem is not merely hypothetical. We once had a meeting with
three of the top administrative officers of the university to discuss similar
issues, and the meeting happened to take place on the final day of the employees’ open enrollment period. We mentioned this and asked whether
the administrators had remembered to meet the deadline. One said that he
was planning on doing it later that day and was glad for the reminder. An12 INTRODUCTION
other admitted to having forgotten, and the third said that he was hoping
that his wife had remembered to do it! The group then turned to the question of what the default should be for a supplementary salary reduction
program (a tax-sheltered savings program). To that point, the default had
been the “back to zero” option. But since contributions to this program
could be stopped at any time, the group unanimously agreed that it would
be better to switch to the status quo “same as last year” default. We are
confident that many absent-minded professors will have more comfortable
retirements as a result.
This example illustrates some basic principles of good choice architecture. Choosers are human, so designers should make life as easy as possible. Send reminders, and then try to minimize the costs imposed on those
who, despite your (and their) best efforts, space out. As we will see, these
principles (and many more) can be applied in both the private and public
sectors, and there is much room for going beyond what is now being done.
A New Path
We shall have a great deal to say about private nudges. But many of
the most important applications of libertarian paternalism are for government, and we will offer a number of recommendations for public policy
and law. Our hope is that that those recommendations might appeal to
both sides of the political divide. Indeed, we believe that the policies suggested by libertarian paternalism can be embraced by Republicans and
Democrats alike. A central reason is that many of those policies cost little
or nothing; they impose no burden on taxpayers at all.
Many Republicans are now seeking to go beyond simple opposition to
government action. As the experience with Hurricane Katrina showed,
government is often required to act, for it is the only means by which the
necessary resources can be mustered, organized, and deployed. Republicans want to make people’s lives better; they are simply skeptical, and legitimately so, about eliminating people’s options.
For their part, many Democrats are willing to abandon their enthusiasm
for aggressive government planning. Sensible Democrats certainly hope
that public institutions can improve people’s lives. But in many domains,
Democrats have come to agree that freedom of choice is a good and even
INTRODUCTION 13
indispensable foundation for public policy. There is a real basis here for
crossing partisan divides.
Libertarian paternalism, we think, is a promising foundation for bipartisanship. In many domains, including environmental protection, family
law, and school choice, we will be arguing that better governance requires
less in the way of government coercion and constraint, and more in the
way of freedom to choose. If incentives and nudges replace requirements
and bans, government will be both smaller and more modest. So, to be
clear: we are not for bigger government, just for better governance.
Actually we have evidence that our optimism (which we admit may be a
bias) is more than just rosy thinking. Libertarian paternalism with respect
to savings, discussed in Chapter 6, has received enthusiastic and widespread bipartisan support in Congress, including from current and former
conservative Republican senators such as Robert Bennett (Utah) and Rick
Santorum (Pa.) and liberal Democrats such as Rahm Emanuel of Illinois.
In 2006 some of the key ideas were quietly enacted into law. The new law
will help many Americans have more comfortable retirements but costs essentially nothing in taxpayer dollars.
In short, libertarian paternalism is neither left nor right, neither Democratic nor Republican. In many areas, the most thoughtful Democrats are
going beyond their enthusiasm for choice-eliminating programs. In many
areas, the most thoughtful Republicans are abandoning their knee-jerk
opposition to constructive governmental initiatives. For all their differences, we hope that both sides might be willing to converge in support of
some gentle nudges.
14 INTRODUCTION
PART
I
HUMANS AND ECONS
This page intentionally left blank
1
BIASES AND BLUNDERS
17
Have a look, if you will, at these two tables:
Suppose that you are thinking about which one would work better as a
coffee table in your living room. What would you say are the dimensions of
the two tables? Take a guess at the ratio of the length to the width of each.
Just eyeball it.
If you are like most people, you think that the table on the left is much
longer and narrower than the one on the right. Typical guesses are that the
ratio of the length to the width is 3:1 for the left table and 1.5:1 for the right
1.1.
Two tables (Adapted from Shepard [1990])
table. Now take out a ruler and measure each table. You will find that the
two table tops are identical. Measure them until you are convinced, because this is a case where seeing is not believing. (When Thaler showed this
example to Sunstein at their usual lunch haunt, Sunstein grabbed his chopstick to check.)
What should we conclude from this example? If you see the left table as
longer and thinner than the right one, you are certifiably human. There is
nothing wrong with you (well, at least not that we can detect from this
test). Still, your judgment in this task was biased, and predictably so. No
one thinks that the right table is thinner! Not only were you wrong; you
were probably confident that you were right. If you like, you can put this
visual to good use when you encounter others who are equally human and
who are disposed to gamble away their money, say, at a bar.
Now consider Figure 1.2. Do these two shapes look the same or different? Again, if you are human, and have decent vision, you probably see
these shapes as being identical, as they are. But these two shapes are just
the table tops from Figure 1.1, removed from their legs and reoriented.
Both the legs and the orientation facilitate the illusion that the table tops
are different in Figure 1.1, so removing these distracters restores the visual
system to its usual amazingly accurate state.*
18 HUMANS AND ECONS
1.2.
Tabletops (Adapted from Shepard [1990])
*One of the tricks used in drawing these tables is that vertical lines look longer than
horizontal lines. As a result, the Gateway Arch in St. Louis looks taller than it is wide,
although the height actually equals the width.
These two figures capture the key insight that behavioral economists
have borrowed from psychologists. Normally the human mind works remarkably well. We can recognize people we have not seen in years, understand the complexities of our native language, and run down a flight of
stairs without falling. Some of us can speak twelve languages, improve the
fanciest computers, and/or create the theory of relativity. However, even
Einstein would probably be fooled by those tables. That does not mean
something is wrong with us as humans, but it does mean that our understanding of human behavior can be improved by appreciating how people
systematically go wrong.
To obtain that understanding, we need to explore some aspects of human thinking. Knowing something about the visual system allowed Roger
Shepard (1990), a psychologist and artist, to draw those deceptive tables.
He knew what to draw to lead our mind astray. Knowing something about
the cognitive system has allowed others to discover systematic biases in the
way we think.
How We Think: Two Systems
The workings of the human brain are more than a bit befuddling.
How can we be so ingenious at some tasks and so clueless at others? Beethoven wrote his incredible ninth symphony while he was deaf, but we
would not be at all surprised if we learned that he often misplaced his
house keys. How can people be simultaneously so smart and so dumb?
Many psychologists and neuroscientists have been converging on a description of the brain’s functioning that helps us make sense of these seeming contradictions. The approach involves a distinction between two kinds
of thinking, one that is intuitive and automatic, and another that is reflective and rational.1 We will call the first the Automatic System and the second the Reflective System. (In the psychology literature, these two systems
are sometimes referred to as System 1 and System 2, respectively.) The key
features of each system are shown in Table 1.1.
The Automatic System is rapid and is or feels instinctive, and it does not
involve what we usually associate with the word thinking. When you duck
because a ball is thrown at you unexpectedly, or get nervous when your airplane hits turbulence, or smile when you see a cute puppy, you are using
BIASES AND BLUNDERS 19
your Automatic System. Brain scientists are able to say that the activities of
the Automatic System are associated with the oldest parts of the brain, the
parts we share with lizards (as well as puppies).2
The Reflective System is more deliberate and self-conscious. We use the
Reflective System when we are asked, “How much is 411 times 37?” Most
people are also likely to use the Reflective System when deciding which
route to take for a trip and whether to go to law school or business school.
When we are writing this book we are (mostly) using our Reflective Systems, but sometimes ideas pop into our heads when we are in the shower
or taking a walk and not thinking at all about the book, and these probably
are coming from our Automatic Systems. (Voters, by the way, seem to rely
primarily on their Automatic System.3 A candidate who makes a bad first
impression, or who tries to win votes by complex arguments and statistical
demonstrations, may well run into trouble.)*
Most Americans have an Automatic System reaction to a temperature
given in Fahrenheit but have to use their Reflective System to process a
temperature given in Celsius; for Europeans, the opposite is true. People
speak their native languages using their Automatic Systems and tend to
struggle to speak another language using their Reflective Systems. Being
truly bilingual means that you speak two languages using the Automatic
System. Accomplished chess players and professional athletes have pretty
20 HUMANS AND ECONS
Table 1.1
Two cognitive systems
Automatic System Reflective System
Uncontrolled Controlled
Effortless Effortful
Associative Deductive
Fast Slow
Unconscious Self-aware
Skilled Rule-following
*It is possible to predict the outcome of congressional elections with frightening accuracy simply by asking people to look quickly at pictures of the candidates and say
which one looks more competent. These judgments, by students who did not know
the candidates, forecast the winner of the election two-thirds of the time! (Toderov et
al. [2005]; Benjamin and Shapiro [2007])
fancy intuitions; their Automatic Systems allow them to size up complex
situations rapidly and to respond with both amazing accuracy and exceptional speed.
One way to think about all this is that the Automatic System is your gut
reaction and the Reflective System is your conscious thought. Gut feelings
can be quite accurate, but we often make mistakes because we rely too
much on our Automatic System. The Automatic System says that “the airplane is shaking, I’m going to die,” while the Reflective System responds,
“Planes are very safe!” The Automatic System says, “That big dog is going
to hurt me,” and the Reflective System replies, “Most pets are quite
sweet.” (In both cases, the Automatic System is squawking all the time.)
The Automatic System starts out with no idea how to play golf or tennis.
Note, however, that countless hours of practice enable an accomplished
golfer to avoid reflection and to rely on her Automatic System—so much
so that good golfers, like other good athletes, know the hazards of “thinking too much” and might well do better to “trust the gut,” or “just do it.”
The Automatic System can be trained with lots of repetition—but such
training takes a lot of time and effort. One reason why teenagers are such
risky drivers is that their Automatic Systems have not had much practice,
and using the Reflective System is much slower.
To see how intuitive thinking works, try the following little test. For
each of the three questions, begin by writing down the first answer that
comes to your mind. Then pause to reflect.
1. A bat and ball cost $1.10 in total. The bat costs $1.00 more than the ball.
How much does the ball cost? _______ cents
2. If it takes 5 machines 5 minutes to make 5 widgets, how long would it
take 100 machines to make 100 widgets? _______ minutes
3. In a lake, there is a patch of lily pads. Every day, the patch doubles in
size. If it takes 48 days for the patch to cover the entire lake, how long
would it take for the patch to cover half of the lake? _______ days
What were your initial answers? Most people say 10 cents, 100 minutes,
and 24 days. But all these answers are wrong. If you think for a minute, you
will see why. If the ball costs 10 cents and the bat costs one dollar more
than the ball, meaning $1.10, then together they cost $1.20, not $1.10. No
one who bothers to check whether his initial answer of 10 cents could posBIASES AND BLUNDERS 21
sibly be right would give that as an answer, but research by Shane Frederick (2005) (who calls this series of questions the cognitive reflection test)
finds that these are the most popular answers even among bright college
students.
The correct answers are 5 cents, 5 minutes, and 47 days, but you knew
that, or at least your Reflective System did if you bothered to consult it.
Econs never make an important decision without checking with their Reflective Systems (if they have time). But Humans sometimes go with the
answer the lizard inside is giving without pausing to think. If you are a television fan, think of Mr. Spock of Star Trek fame as someone whose Reflective System is always in control. (Captain Kirk: “You’d make a splendid
computer, Mr. Spock.” Mr. Spock: “That is very kind of you, Captain!”)
In contrast, Homer Simpson seems to have forgotten where he put his Reflective System. (In a commentary on gun control, Homer once replied to
a gun store clerk who informed him of a mandatory five-day waiting period before buying a weapon, “Five days? But I’m mad now!”)
One of our major goals in this book is to see how the world might be
made easier, or safer, for the Homers among us (and the Homer lurking
somewhere in each of us). If people can rely on their Automatic Systems
without getting into terrible trouble, their lives should be easier, better,
and longer.
Rules of Thumb
Most of us are busy, our lives are complicated, and we can’t spend
all our time thinking and analyzing everything. When we have to make
judgments, such as guessing Angelina Jolie’s age or the distance between
Cleveland and Philadelphia, we use simple rules of thumb to help us. We
use rules of thumb because most of the time they are quick and useful.
In fact, there is a great collection edited by Tom Parker titled Rules of
Thumb. Parker wrote the book by asking friends to send him good rules of
thumb. For example, “One ostrich egg will serve 24 people for brunch.”
“Ten people will raise the temperature of an average size room by one degree per hour.” And one to which we will return: “No more than 25 percent of the guests at a university dinner party can come from the economics department without spoiling the conversation.”
22 HUMANS AND ECONS
Although rules of thumb can be very helpful, their use can also lead to
systematic biases. This insight, first developed decades ago by two Israeli
psychologists, Amos Tversky and Daniel Kahneman (1974), has changed
the way psychologists (and eventually economists) think about thinking.
Their original work identified three heuristics, or rules of thumb—anchoring, availability, and representativeness—and the biases that are associated with each. Their research program has come to be known as the
“heuristics and biases” approach to the study of human judgment. More
recently, psychologists have come to understand that these heuristics and
biases emerge from the interplay between the Automatic System and the
Reflective System. Let’s see how.
Anchoring
Suppose we are asked to guess the population of Milwaukee, a city
about two hours north of Chicago, where we live. Neither of us knows
much about Milwaukee, but we think that it is the biggest city in Wisconsin.
How should we go about guessing? Well, one thing we could do is start
with something we do know, which is the population of Chicago, roughly
three million. So we might think, Milwaukee is a major city, but clearly not
as big as Chicago, so, hmmm, maybe it is one-third the size, say one million.
Now consider someone from Green Bay, Wisconsin, who is asked the same
question. She also doesn’t know the answer, but she does know that Green
Bay has about one hundred thousand people and knows that Milwaukee is
larger, so guesses, say, three times larger—three hundred thousand.
This process is called “anchoring and adjustment.” You start with some
anchor, the number you know, and adjust in the direction you think is appropriate. So far, so good. The bias occurs because the adjustments are typically insufficient. Experiments repeatedly show that, in problems similar to
our example, people from Chicago are likely to make a high guess (based
on their high anchor) while those from Green Bay guess low (based on
their low anchor). As it happens, Milwaukee has about 580,000 people.4
Even obviously irrelevant anchors creep into the decision-making process. Try this one yourself. Take the last three digits of your phone number
and add two hundred. Write the number down. Now, when do you think
Attila the Hun sacked Europe? Was it before or after that year? What is your
best guess? (We will give you one hint: It was after the birth of Jesus.) Even
BIASES AND BLUNDERS 23
if you do not know much about European history, you do know enough to
know that whenever Attila did whatever he did, the date has nothing to do
with your phone number. Still, when we conduct this experiment with our
students, we get answers that are more than three hundred years later from
students who start with high anchors rather than low ones. (The right answer is 411.)
Anchors can even influence how you think your life is going. In one experiment, college students were asked two questions: (a) How happy are
you? (b) How often are you dating? When the two questions were asked in
this order the correlation between the two questions was quite low (.11).
But when the question order was reversed, so that the dating question was
asked first, the correlation jumped to .62. Apparently, when prompted by
the dating question, the students use what might be called the “dating
heuristic” to answer the question about how happy they are. “Gee, I can’t
remember when I last had a date! I must be miserable.” Similar results can
be obtained from married couples if the dating question is replaced by a
lovemaking question.5
In the language of this book, anchors serve as nudges. We can influence
the figure you will choose in a particular situation by ever-so-subtly suggesting a starting point for your thought process. When charities ask you
for a donation, they typically offer you a range of options such as $100,
$250, $1,000, $5,000, or “other.” If the charity’s fund-raisers have an idea
of what they are doing, these values are not picked at random, because the
options influence the amount of money people decide to donate. People
will give more if the options are $100, $250, $1,000, and $5,000, than if
the options are $50, $75, $100, and $150.
In many domains, the evidence shows that, within reason, the more you
ask for, the more you tend to get. Lawyers who sue cigarette companies often win astronomical amounts, in part because they have successfully induced juries to anchor on multimillion-dollar figures. Clever negotiators
often get amazing deals for their clients by producing an opening offer
that makes their adversary thrilled to pay half that very high amount.
Availability
How much should you worry about hurricanes, nuclear power,
terrorism, mad cow disease, alligator attacks, or avian flu? And how much
24 HUMANS AND ECONS
care should you take in avoiding risks associated with each? What, exactly,
should you do to prevent the kinds of dangers that you face in ordinary
life?
In answering questions of this kind, most people use what is called
the availability heuristic. They assess the likelihood of risks by asking how
readily examples come to mind. If people can easily think of relevant examples, they are far more likely to be frightened and concerned than if they
cannot. A risk that is familiar, like that associated with terrorism in the aftermath of 9/11, will be seen as more serious than a risk that is less familiar,
like that associated with sunbathing or hotter summers. Homicides are
more available than suicides, and so people tend to believe, wrongly, that
more people die from homicide.
Accessibility and salience are closely related to availability, and they are
important as well. If you have personally experienced a serious earthquake,
you’re more likely to believe that an earthquake is likely than if you read
about it in a weekly magazine. Thus vivid and easily imagined causes of
death (for example, tornadoes) often receive inflated estimates of probability, and less-vivid causes (for example, asthma attacks) receive low estimates, even if they occur with a far greater frequency (here a factor of
twenty). So, too, recent events have a greater impact on our behavior, and
on our fears, than earlier ones. In all these highly available examples, the
Automatic System is keenly aware of the risk (perhaps too keenly), without
having to resort to any tables of boring statistics.
The availability heuristic helps to explain much risk-related behavior, including both public and private decisions to take precautions. Whether
people buy insurance for natural disasters is greatly affected by recent experiences.6 In the aftermath of an earthquake, purchases of new earthquake insurance policies rise sharply—but purchases decline steadily from
that point, as vivid memories recede. If floods have not occurred in the immediate past, people who live on floodplains are far less likely to purchase
insurance. And people who know someone who has experienced a flood
are more likely to buy flood insurance for themselves, regardless of the
flood risk they actually face.
Biased assessments of risk can perversely influence how we prepare for
and respond to crises, business choices, and the political process. When Internet stocks have done very well, people might well buy Internet stocks,
BIASES AND BLUNDERS 25
even if by that point they’ve become a bad investment. Or suppose that
people falsely think that some risks (a nuclear power accident) are high,
whereas others (a stroke) are relatively low. Such misperceptions can affect
policy, because governments are likely to allocate their resources in a way
that fits with people’s fears rather than in response to the most likely danger.
When “availability bias” is at work, both private and public decisions
may be improved if judgments can be nudged back in the direction of true
probabilities. A good way to increase people’s fear of a bad outcome is to
remind them of a related incident in which things went wrong; a good way
to increase people’s confidence is to remind them of a similar situation in
which everything worked out for the best. The pervasive problems are that
easily remembered events may inflate people’s probability judgments, and
that if no such events come to mind, their judgments of likelihoods might
be distorted downward.
Representativeness
The third of the original three heuristics bears an unwieldy name:
representativeness. Think of it as the similarity heuristic. The idea is that
when asked to judge how likely it is that A belongs to category B, people
(and especially their Automatic Systems) answer by asking themselves how
similar A is to their image or stereotype of B (that is, how “representative”
A is of B). Like the other two heuristics we have discussed, this one is used
because it often works. We think a 6-foot-8-inch African-American man is
more likely to be a professional basketball player than a 5-foot-6-inch Jewish guy because there are lots of tall black basketball players and not many
short Jewish ones (at least not these days). Stereotypes are sometimes
right!
Again, biases can creep in when similarity and frequency diverge. The
most famous demonstration of such biases involves the case of a hypothetical woman named Linda. In this experiment, subjects were told the following: “Linda is thirty-one years old, single, outspoken, and very bright.
She majored in philosophy. As a student, she was deeply concerned with issues of discrimination and social justice and also participated in antinuclear
demonstrations.” Then people were asked to rank, in order of the probability of their occurrence, eight possible futures for Linda. The two crucial
26 HUMANS AND ECONS
answers were “bank teller” and “bank teller and active in the feminist
movement.” Most people said that Linda was less likely to be a bank teller
than to be a bank teller and active in the feminist movement.
This is an obvious logical mistake. It is, of course, not logically possible
for any two events to be more likely than one of them alone. It just has to
be the case that Linda is more likely to be a bank teller than a feminist bank
teller, because all feminist bank tellers are bank tellers. The error stems
from the use of the representativeness heuristic: Linda’s description seems
to match “bank teller and active in the feminist movement” far better than
“bank teller.” As Stephen Jay Gould (1991) once observed, “I know [the
right answer], yet a little homunculus in my head continues to jump up
and down, shouting at me—‘but she can’t just be a bank teller; read the
description!’” Gould’s homunculus is the Automatic System in action.
Use of the representativeness heuristic can cause serious misperceptions
of patterns in everyday life. When events are determined by chance, such as
a sequence of coin tosses, people expect the resulting string of heads and
tails to be representative of what they think of as random. Unfortunately,
people do not have accurate perceptions of what random sequences look
like. When they see the outcomes of random processes, they often detect
patterns that they think have great meaning but in fact are just due to
chance. You might flip a coin three times, see it come up heads every time,
and conclude that there is something funny about the coin. But the fact is
that if you flip any coin a lot, it won’t be so unusual to see three heads in a
row. (Try it and you’ll see. As a little test, Sunstein, having just finished this
paragraph, flipped a regular penny three times—and got heads every time.
He was amazed. He shouldn’t have been.)
A less trivial example, from the Cornell psychologist Tom Gilovich
(1991), comes from the experience of London residents during the German bombing campaigns of World War II. London newspapers published
maps, such as the one shown in Figure 1.3, displaying the location of the
strikes from German V-1 and V-2 missiles that landed in central London.
As you can see, the pattern does not seem at all random. Bombs appear to
be clustered around the River Thames and also in the northwest sector of
the map. People in London expressed concern at the time because the
pattern seemed to suggest that the Germans could aim their bombs with
great precision. Some Londoners even speculated that the blank spaces
BIASES AND BLUNDERS 27
were probably the neighborhoods where German spies lived. They were
wrong. In fact the Germans could do no better than aim their bombs at
Central London and hope for the best. A detailed statistical analysis of the
dispersion of the location of the bomb strikes determined that within London the distribution of bomb strikes was indeed random.
Still, the location of the bomb strikes does not look random. What is going on here? We often see patterns because we construct our informal tests
only after looking at the evidence. The World War II example is an excellent illustration of this problem. Suppose we divide the map into quadrants, as in Figure 1.4a. If we then do a formal statistical test—or, for the
less statistically inclined, just count the number of hits in each quadrant—
we do find evidence of a nonrandom pattern. However, nothing in nature
suggests that this is the right way to test for randomness. Suppose instead
we form the quadrants diagonally as in Figure 1.4b. We are now unable to
reject the hypothesis that the bombs land at random. Unfortunately, we
do not subject our own perceptions to such rigorous alternative testing.
Gilovich (with colleagues Vallone and Tversky [1985]) is also responsible for perhaps the most famous (or infamous) example of misperception
of randomness, namely the widely held view among basketball fans that
28 HUMANS AND ECONS
1.3.
Map of London showing V-1 rocket strikes (Adapted from Gilovich [1991])
1.4.
Map of London showing V-1 rocket strikes, with vertical-horizontal grid (a) and diagonal grid (b). The figures outside the grid refer to the number of dots in the quadrant.
(Adapted from Gilovich [1991])
there is a strong pattern of “streak shooting.” We will not go into this in
detail, because our experience tells us that the cognitive illusion here is so
powerful that most people (influenced by their Automatic System) are unwilling even to consider the possibility that their strongly held beliefs
might be wrong. But here is the short version. Most basketball fans think
that a player is more likely to make his next shot if he has made his last shot,
or even better, his last few shots. Players who have hit a few shots in a row,
or even most of their recent shots, are said to have a “hot hand,” which is
taken by all sports announcers to be a good signal about the future. Passing the ball to the player who is hot is taken to be an obvious bit of good
strategy.
It turns out that the “hot hand” is just a myth. Players who have made
their last few shots are no more likely to make their next shot (actually a bit
less likely). Really.
Once people are told these facts, they quickly start forming alternative
versions of the hot-hand theory. Maybe the defense adjusts and guards
the “hot” player more closely. Maybe the hot player adjusts and starts
taking harder shots. These are fine observations that need to be investigated. But notice that, before seeing the data, when fans were asked about
actual shooting percentages after a series of made shots, they routinely
subscribed to the hot-hand theory—no qualifiers were thought necessary. Many researchers have been so sure that the original Gilovich results
were wrong that they set out to find the hot hand. To date, no one has
found it.7
Jay Koehler and Caryn Conley (2003) performed a particularly clean
test using the annual three-point shooting contest held at the National
Basketball Association All-Star Game. In this contest, the players (among
the best three-point shooters in the league) take a series of shots from behind the three-point shooting arc. Their goal is to make as many shots as
possible in sixty seconds. Without any defense or alternative shots, this
would seem to be an ideal situation in which to observe the hot hand.
However, as in the original study, there was no evidence of any streakiness.
This absence of streak shooting did not stop the announcers from detecting sudden temperature variations in the players. (“Dana Baros is hot!”
“Legler is on fire!”) But these outbursts by the announcers had no predictive power. Before the announcers spoke of hotness, the players had made
30 HUMANS AND ECONS
80.5 percent of their three previous shots. After the hotness pronouncements, players made only 55.2 percent—not significantly better than their
overall shooting percentage in the contest, 53.9 percent.
Of course, it is no great problem if basketball fans are confused about
what they see when they are watching games on television. But the same
cognitive biases occur in other, more weighty domains. Consider the phenomenon of “cancer clusters.” These can cause a great deal of private and
public consternation, and they often attract sustained investigations, designed to see what on earth (or elsewhere) could possibly have caused a
sudden and otherwise inexplicable outbreak of cancer cases. Suppose that
in a particular neighborhood we find an apparently elevated cancer rate—
maybe ten people, in a group of five hundred, have been diagnosed with
cancer within the same six-month period. Maybe all ten people live within
three blocks of one another. And in fact, American officials receive reports
of more than one thousand suspected cancer clusters every year, with many
of these suspected clusters investigated further for a possible “epidemic.”8
The problem is that in a population of three hundred million, it is inevitable that certain neighborhoods will see unusually high cancer rates
within any one-year period. The resulting “cancer clusters” may be products of random fluctuations. Nonetheless, people insist that they could not
possibly occur by chance. They get scared, and sometimes government
wrongly intervenes on their behalf. Mostly, though, there is thankfully
nothing to worry about, except for the fact that the use of the representativeness heuristic can cause people to confuse random fluctuations with
causal patterns.
Optimism and Overconfidence
Before the start of Thaler’s class in Managerial Decision Making,
students fill out an anonymous survey on the course Web site. One of the
questions is “In which decile do you expect to fall in the distribution of
grades in this class?” Students can check the top 10 percent, the second 10
percent, and so forth. Since these are mba students, they are presumably
well aware that in any distribution, half the population will be in the top 50
percent and half in the bottom. And only 10 percent of the class can, in
fact, end up in the top decile.
BIASES AND BLUNDERS 31
Nevertheless, the results of this survey reveal a high degree of unrealistic
optimism about performance in the class. Typically less than 5 percent of
the class expects their performance to be below the median (the 50th percentile) and more than half the class expects to perform in one of the top
two deciles. Invariably, the largest group of students put themselves in the
second decile. We think this is most likely explained by modesty. They really think they will end up in the top decile, but are too modest to say so.
MBA students are not the only ones overconfident about their abilities.
The “above average” effect is pervasive. Ninety percent of all drivers think
they are above average behind the wheel, even if they don’t live in Lake
Wobegon. And nearly everyone (including some who are rarely seen smiling) thinks he has an above-average sense of humor. (That is because they
know what is funny!) This applies to professors, too. About 94 percent of
professors at a large university were found to believe that they are better
than the average professor, and there is every reason to think that such
overconfidence applies to professors in general.9 (Yes, we admit to this particular failing.)
People are unrealistically optimistic even when the stakes are high.
About 50 percent of marriages end in divorce, and this is a statistic most
people have heard. But around the time of the ceremony, almost all couples believe that there is approximately a zero percent chance that their
marriage will end in divorce—even those who have already been divorced!10 (Second marriage, Samuel Johnson once quipped, “is the triumph of hope over experience.”) A similar point applies to entrepreneurs
starting new businesses, where the failure rate is at least 50 percent. In one
survey of people starting new businesses (typically small businesses, such as
contracting firms, restaurants, and salons), respondents were asked two
questions: (a) What do you think is the chance of success for a typical business like yours? (b) What is your chance of success? The most common answers to these questions were 50 percent and 90 percent, respectively, and
many said 100 percent to the second question.11
Unrealistic optimism can explain a lot of individual risk taking, especially in the domain of risks to life and health. Asked to envision their future, students typically say that they are far less likely than their classmates
to be fired from a job, to have a heart attack or get cancer, to be divorced
after a few years of marriage, or to have a drinking problem. Gay men sys32 HUMANS AND ECONS
tematically underestimate the chance that they will contract AIDS, even
though they know about AIDS risks in general. Older people underestimate the likelihood that they will be in a car accident or suffer major diseases. Smokers are aware of the statistical risks, and often even exaggerate
them, but most believe that they are less likely to be diagnosed with lung
cancer and heart disease than most nonsmokers. Lotteries are successful
partly because of unrealistic optimism.12
Unrealistic optimism is a pervasive feature of human life; it characterizes
most people in most social categories. When they overestimate their personal immunity from harm, people may fail to take sensible preventive
steps. If people are running risks because of unrealistic optimism, they
might be able to benefit from a nudge. In fact, we have already mentioned
one possibility: if people are reminded of a bad event, they may not continue to be so optimistic.
Gains and Losses
People hate losses (and their Automatic Systems can get pretty
emotional about them). Roughly speaking, losing something makes you
twice as miserable as gaining the same thing makes you happy. In more
technical language, people are “loss averse.” How do we know this?
Consider a simple experiment.13 Half the students in a class are given
coffee mugs with the insignia of their home university embossed on it. The
students who do not get a mug are asked to examine their neighbor’s
mugs. Then mug owners are invited to sell their mugs and nonowners are
invited to buy them. They do so by answering the question “At each of the
following prices, indicate whether you would be willing to (give up your
mug/buy a mug).” The results show that those with mugs demand
roughly twice as much to give up their mugs as others are willing to pay to
get one. Thousands of mugs have been used in dozens of replications of
this experiment, but the results are nearly always the same. Once I have a
mug, I don’t want to give it up. But if I don’t have one, I don’t feel an urgent need to buy one. What this means is that people do not assign specific
values to objects. When they have to give something up, they are hurt
more than they are pleased if they acquire the very same thing.
It is also possible to measure loss aversion with gambles. Suppose I ask
BIASES AND BLUNDERS 33
34 HUMANS AND ECONS
you whether you want to make a bet. Heads you win $X, tails you lose
$100. How much does X have to be for you to take the bet? For most people, the answer to this question is somewhere around $200. This implies
that the prospect of winning $200 just offsets the prospect of losing $100.
Loss aversion helps produce inertia, meaning a strong desire to stick
with your current holdings. If you are reluctant to give up what you have
because you do not want to incur losses, then you will turn down trades
you might have otherwise made. In another experiment, half the students
in a class received coffee mugs (of course) and half got large chocolate
bars. The mugs and the chocolate cost about the same, and in pretests students were as likely to choose one as the other. Yet when offered the opportunity to switch from a mug to a candy bar or vice versa, only one in ten
switched.
As we will see, loss aversion operates as a kind of cognitive nudge, pressing us not to make changes, even when changes are very much in our interests.
Status Quo Bias
Loss aversion is not the only reason for inertia. For lots of reasons,
people have a more general tendency to stick with their current situation.
This phenomenon, which William Samuelson and Richard Zeckhauser
(1988) have dubbed the “status quo bias,” has been demonstrated in numerous situations. Most teachers know that students tend to sit in the
same seats in class, even without a seating chart. But status quo bias can occur even when the stakes are much larger, and it can get us into a lot of
trouble.
For example, in retirement savings plans, such as 401(k)s, most participants pick an asset allocation and then forget about it. In one study conducted in the late 1980s, participants in tiaa-cref, the pension plan of
many college professors, the median number of changes in the asset allocation of the lifetime of a professor was, believe it or not, zero. In other
words, over the course of their careers, more than half of the participants
made exactly no changes to the way their contributions were being allocated. Perhaps even more telling, many married participants who were sin-
gle when they joined the plan still have their mothers listed as their beneficiaries!
Status quo bias is easily exploited. Many years ago American Express
wrote Sunstein a cheerful letter telling him that he could receive, for free,
three-month subscriptions to five magazines of his choice. Free subscriptions seem like a bargain, even if the magazines rarely get read, so Sunstein
happily made his choices. What he didn’t realize was that unless he took
some action to cancel his subscription, he would continue to receive the
magazines, paying for them at the normal rate. For about a decade, he has
continued to subscribe to magazines that he hardly ever reads. (He keeps
intending to cancel those subscriptions, but somehow never gets around
to it. We hope to get around to discussing procrastination in the next
chapter.)
One of the causes of status quo bias is a lack of attention. Many people
adopt what we will call the “yeah, whatever” heuristic. A good illustration
is the carryover effect in television viewing. Network executives spend a lot
of time working on scheduling because they know that a viewer who starts
the evening on nbc tends to stay there. Since remote controls have been
pervasive in this country for decades, the actual “switching” costs in this
context are literally one thumb press. But when one show ends and the
next one comes on, a surprisingly high number of viewers (implicitly) say,
“yeah, whatever” and keep watching. Nor is Sunstein the only victim of
automatic renewal of magazine subscriptions. Those who are in charge of
circulation know that when renewal is automatic, and when people have to
make a phone call to cancel, the likelihood of renewal is much higher than
it is when people have to indicate that they actually want to continue to receive the magazine.
The combination of loss aversion with mindless choosing implies that if
an option is designated as the “default,” it will attract a large market share.
Default options thus act as powerful nudges. In many contexts defaults
have some extra nudging power because consumers may feel, rightly or
wrongly, that default options come with an implicit endorsement from the
default setter, be it the employer, government, or TV scheduler. For this
and other reasons, setting the best possible defaults will be a theme we explore often in the course of this book.
BIASES AND BLUNDERS 35
Framing
Suppose that you are suffering from serious heart disease and that
your doctor proposes a grueling operation. You’re understandably curious
about the odds. The doctor says, “Of one hundred patients who have this
operation, ninety are alive after five years.” What will you do? If we fill in
the facts in a certain way, the doctor’s statement will be pretty comforting,
and you’ll probably have the operation.
But suppose the doctor frames his answer in a somewhat different way.
Suppose that he says, “Of one hundred patients who have this operation,
ten are dead after five years.” If you’re like most people, the doctor’s statement will sound pretty alarming, and you might not have the operation.
The Automatic System thinks: “A significant number of people are dead,
and I might be one of them!” In numerous experiments, people react very
differently to the information that “ninety of one hundred are alive” than
to the information that “ten of one hundred are dead”—even though the
content of the two statements is exactly the same. Even experts are subject
to framing effects. When doctors are told that “ninety of one hundred are
alive,” they are more likely to recommend the operation than if told that
“ten of one hundred are dead.”14
Framing matters in many domains. When credit cards started to become
popular forms of payment in the 1970s, some retail merchants wanted to
charge different prices to their cash and credit card customers. (Credit card
companies typically charge retailers 1 percent of each sale.) To prevent this,
credit card companies adopted rules that forbade their retailers from
charging different prices to cash and credit customers. However, when a
bill was introduced in Congress to outlaw such rules, the credit card lobby
turned its attention to language. Its preference was that if a company
charged different prices to cash and credit customers, the credit price
should be considered the “normal” (default) price and the cash price a discount—rather than the alternative of making the cash price the usual price
and charging a surcharge to credit card customers.
The credit card companies had a good intuitive understanding of what
psychologists would come to call “framing.” The idea is that choices depend, in part, on the way in which problems are stated. The point matters
a great deal for public policy. Energy conservation is now receiving a lot of
36 HUMANS AND ECONS
attention, so consider the following information campaigns: (a) If you use
energy conservation methods, you will save $350 per year; (b) If you do
not use energy conservation methods, you will lose $350 per year. It turns
out that information campaign (b), framed in terms of losses, is far more
effective than information campaign (a). If the government wants to encourage energy conservation, option (b) is a stronger nudge.
Framing works because people tend to be somewhat mindless, passive
decision makers. Their Reflective System does not do the work that would
be required to check and see whether reframing the questions would produce a different answer. One reason they don’t do this is that they
wouldn’t know what to make of the contradiction. This implies that
frames are powerful nudges, and must be selected with caution.
So What?
Our goal in this chapter has been to offer a brief glimpse at human
fallibility. The picture that emerges is one of busy people trying to cope in
a complex world in which they cannot afford to think deeply about every
choice they have to make. People adopt sensible rules of thumb that sometimes lead them astray. Because they are busy and have limited attention,
they accept questions as posed rather than trying to determine whether
their answers would vary under alternative formulations. The bottom line,
from our point of view, is that people are, shall we say, nudge-able. Their
choices, even in life’s most important decisions, are influenced in ways that
would not be anticipated in a standard economic framework. Here is one
final example to illustrate.
One of the most scenic urban thoroughfares in the world is Chicago’s
Lake Shore Drive, which hugs the Lake Michigan coastline that is the
city’s eastern boundary. The drive offers stunning views of Chicago’s magnificent skyline. There is one stretch of this road that puts drivers through
a series of S curves. These curves are dangerous. Many drivers fail to take
heed of the reduced speed limit (25 mph) and wipe out. Recently, the city
has employed a new way of encouraging drivers to slow down.
At the beginning of the dangerous curve, drivers encounter a sign
painted on the road warning of the lower speed limit, and then a series of
white stripes painted onto the road. The stripes do not provide much if any
BIASES AND BLUNDERS 37

tactile information (they are not speed bumps) but rather just send a visual
signal to drivers. When the stripes first appear, they are evenly spaced, but
as drivers reach the most dangerous portion of the curve, the stripes get
closer together, giving the sensation that driving speed is increasing (see
Figure 1.5). One’s natural instinct is to slow down. When we drive on this
familiar stretch of road, we find that those lines are speaking to us, gently
urging us to touch the brake before the apex of the curve. We have been
nudged.
BIASES AND BLUNDERS 39
2
RESISTING TEMPTATION
40
Temptation
Many years ago, Thaler was hosting dinner for some guests (other
then-young economists) and put out a large bowl of cashew nuts to nibble
on with the first bottle of wine. Within a few minutes it became clear that
the bowl of nuts was going to be consumed in its entirety, and that the
guests might lack sufficient appetite to enjoy all the food that was to follow. Leaping into action, Thaler grabbed the bowl of nuts, and (while
sneaking a few more nuts for himself) removed the bowl to the kitchen,
where it was put out of sight.
When he returned, the guests thanked him for removing the nuts. The
conversation immediately turned to the theoretical question of how they
could possibly be happy about the fact that there was no longer a bowl of
nuts in front of them. (You can now see the wisdom of the rule of thumb
mentioned in Chapter 1 about a cap on the proportion of economists
among attendees at a dinner party.) In economics (and in ordinary life), a
basic principle is that you can never be made worse off by having more options, because you can always turn them down. Before Thaler removed the
nuts the group had the choice of whether to eat the nuts or not—now they
didn’t. In the land of Econs, it is against the law to be happy about this!
To help us understand this example, consider how the preferences of the
group seemed to evolve over time. At 7:15, just before Thaler removed the
nuts, the dinner guests had three options: eat a few nuts; eat all the nuts;
and eat no more nuts. Their first choice would be to eat just a few more
nuts, followed by eating no more nuts. The worst option was finishing the
bowl, since that would ruin dinner. But by 7:30, had the nuts remained on
the table, the group would have finished the bowl, thereby reaching their
least favorite option. Why would the group change its mind in the space of
just fifteen minutes? Or do we really want to say that the group has changed
its mind?
In the language of economics, the group is said to display behavior that
is dynamically inconsistent. Initially people prefer A to B, but they later
choose B over A. We can see dynamic inconsistency in many places. On
Saturday morning people might say that they prefer exercising to watching
television, but once the afternoon comes, they are on the couch at home
watching the football game. How can such behavior be understood?
Two factors must be introduced in order to understand the cashew phenomenon: temptation and mindlessness. Human beings have been aware
of the concept of temptation at least since the time of Adam and Eve, but
for purposes of understanding the value of nudges, that concept needs
elaboration. What does it mean for something to be “tempting”?
As with Supreme Court Justice Potter Stewart’s “I know it when I see
it” adage about pornography, temptation is easier to recognize than to
define. Our preferred definition requires recognizing that people’s state of
arousal varies over time. To simplify things we will consider just the two
end points: hot and cold. When Sally is very hungry and appetizing aromas
are emanating from the kitchen, we can say she is in a hot state. When Sally
is thinking abstractly on Tuesday about the right number of cashews she
should consume before dinner on Saturday, she is in a cold state. We will
call something “tempting” if we consume more of it when hot than when
cold. None of this means that decisions made in a cold state are always better. For example, sometimes we have to be in a hot state to overcome our
fears about trying new things. Sometimes dessert really is delicious, and we
do best to go for it. Sometimes it is best to fall in love. But it is clear that
when we are in a hot state, we can often get into a lot of trouble.
Most people realize that temptation exists, and they take steps to overcome it. The classic example is that of Ulysses, who faced the peril of the
Sirens and their irresistible songs. While in a cold state, Ulysses instructed
his crew to fill their ears with wax so that they would not be tempted by the
music. He also asked the crew to tie him to the mast so that he could listen
RESISTING TEMPTATION 41
for himself but be restrained from submitting to the temptation to steer
the ship closer when the music put him into a hot state.
Ulysses successfully solved his problem. For most of us, however, selfcontrol issues arise because we underestimate the effect of arousal. This is
something the behavioral economist George Loewenstein (1996) calls the
“hot-cold empathy gap.” When in a cold state, we do not appreciate how
much our desires and our behavior will be altered when we are “under the
influence” of arousal. As a result, our behavior reflects a certain naïveté
about the effects that context can have on choice. Tom is on a diet and
agrees to go out on a business dinner, thinking that he will be able to limit
himself to one glass of wine and no dessert. But the host orders a second
bottle of wine and the waiter brings by the dessert cart, and all bets are off.
Marilyn thinks that she can go into a department store when they are having a big sale and just see whether they have something on sale that she really needs. She ends up with shoes that hurt (but were 70 percent off).
Robert thinks he will engage only in safe sex, but then must make all the
crucial decisions while aroused. Similar problems affect those who have
problems with smoking, alcohol, a failure to exercise, excessive borrowing,
and insufficient savings.
Self-control problems can be illuminated by thinking about an individual as containing two semiautonomous selves, a far-sighted “Planner” and
a myopic “Doer.” You can think of the Planner as speaking for your Reflective System, or the Mr. Spock lurking within you, and the Doer as heavily
influenced by the Automatic System, or everyone’s Homer Simpson. The
Planner is trying to promote your long-term welfare but must cope with
the feelings, mischief, and strong will of the Doer, who is exposed to the
temptations that come with arousal. Recent research in neuroeconomics
(yes, there really is such a field) has found evidence consistent with this
two-system conception of self-control. Some parts of the brain get
tempted, and other parts are prepared to enable us to resist temptation by
assessing how we should react to the temptation.1 Sometimes the two
parts of the brain can be in severe conflict—a kind of battle that one or the
other is bound to lose.
42 HUMANS AND ECONS
Mindless Choosing
The cashew problem is not only one of temptation. It also involves
the type of mindless behavior we discussed in the context of inertia. In
many situations, people put themselves into an “automatic pilot” mode, in
which they are not actively paying attention to the task at hand. (The Automatic System is very comfortable that way.) On a Saturday morning
when we set out to run an errand, we can easily find ourselves driving our
usual route to work—until we realize we are headed in the opposite direction from our intended destination, the grocery store. On a Sunday morning, we follow our ordinary routine with coffee and the newspaper—until
we realize that we had arranged to meet a friend for brunch an hour earlier.
Eating turns out to be one of the most mindless activities we do. Many of
us simply eat whatever is put in front of us. That is why even massive bowls
of cashews are likely to be consumed completely, regardless of the quality
of the food that is soon to be arriving.
The same is true of popcorn—even stale popcorn. A few years ago,
Brian Wansink and his colleagues ran an experiment in a Chicago movie
theater in which moviegoers found themselves with a free bucket of stale
popcorn.2 (It had been popped five days earlier and stored so as to ensure
that it would actually squeak when eaten.) People were not specifically informed of its staleness, but they didn’t like the popcorn. As one moviegoer
said, “It was like eating Styrofoam packing peanuts.” In the experiment,
half of the moviegoers received a big bucket of popcorn and half received
a medium-sized bucket. On average, recipients of the big bucket ate about
53 percent more popcorn—even though they didn’t really like it. After the
movie, Wansink asked the recipients of the big bucket whether they might
have eaten more because of the size of their bucket. Most denied the possibility, saying, “Things like that don’t trick me.” But they were wrong.
The same is true of soup. In another Wansink (2006) masterpiece, people sat down to a large bowl of Campbell’s tomato soup and were told to
eat as much as they wanted. Unbeknownst to them, the soup bowls were
designed to refill themselves (with empty bottoms connected to machinery beneath the table). No matter how much soup subjects ate, the bowl
never emptied. Many people just kept eating, not paying attention to the
fact that they were really eating a great deal of soup, until the experiment
RESISTING TEMPTATION 43
was (mercifully) ended. Large plates and large packages mean more eating;
they are a form of choice architecture, and they work as major nudges.
(Hint: if you would like to lose weight, get smaller plates, buy little packages of what you like, and don’t keep tempting food in the refrigerator.)
When self-control problems and mindless choosing are combined, the
result is a series of bad outcomes for real people. Millions of Americans still
smoke in spite of the evidence that smoking has terrible health consequences, and, significantly, the overwhelming majority of smokers say that
they would like to quit. Nearly two-thirds of Americans are overweight or
obese. Many people never get around to joining their company’s retirement savings plan, even when it is heavily subsidized. Together, these facts
suggest that significant numbers of people could benefit from a nudge.
Self-Control Strategies
Since people are at least partly aware of their weaknesses, they take
steps to engage outside help. We make lists to help us remember what to
buy at the grocery store. We buy an alarm clock to help us get up in the
morning. We ask friends to stop us from having dessert or to fortify our efforts to quit smoking. In these cases, our Planners are taking steps to control the actions of our Doers, often by trying to change the incentives that
Doers face.
Unfortunately, Doers are often difficult to rein in (think of controlling
Homer), and they can foil the best efforts of Planners. Consider the mundane but revealing example of the alarm clock. The optimistic Planner sets
the alarm for 6:15 a.m., hoping for a full day of work, but the sleepy Doer
turns off the alarm and goes back to sleep until 9:00. This can lead to fierce
battles between the Planner and the Doer. Some Planners put the alarm
clock on the other side of the room, so the Doer at least has to get up to
turn it off, but if the Doer crawls back into bed, all is lost. Fortunately, enterprising firms sometimes offer to help the Planner out.
Consider the alarm clock “Clocky,” pictured in Figure 2.1. Clocky is the
“alarm clock that runs away and hides if you don’t get out of bed.” With
Clocky, the Planner sets the number of snooze minutes the Doer will be
permitted in the morning. When that number runs out, the clock jumps
off the night stand and moves around the room making annoying sounds.
44 HUMANS AND ECONS
The only way to turn the damn thing off is to get out of bed and find it. By
that time, even a groggy Doer is awake.
Planners have a number of available strategies, such as Clocky, to control
recalcitrant Doers, but they can sometimes use some help from outsiders.
We will be exploring how private and public institutions can provide that
help. In daily life, one strategy involves informal bets. Thaler once helped
a young colleague by using this strategy. The colleague (let’s call him
David) had been hired as a new faculty member with the expectation that
he would complete the requirements for his Ph.D. before he arrived, or at
worst within his first year as a faculty member. David had lots of incentives
RESISTING TEMPTATION 45
2.1.
Clocky advertisement (Used by permission of nanda llc.)
to finish his thesis, including a strong financial incentive: until he graduated the university treated him as an “instructor” rather than an assistant
professor and did not make its normal contributions to his retirement
plan, which amounted to 10 percent of his salary (thousands of dollars a
year). David’s inner Planner knew that he needed to stop procrastinating
and get his thesis done, but his Doer was involved in many other more exciting projects and always put off the drudgery of writing up the thesis.
(Thinking about new ideas is usually more fun than writing up old ones.)
That is when Thaler intervened by offering David the following deal.
David would write Thaler a series of checks for $100, payable on the first
day of each of the next few months. Thaler would cash each check if David
did not put a copy of a new chapter of the thesis under his door by midnight of the corresponding month. Furthermore, Thaler promised to use
the money to have a party to which David would not be invited. David
completed his thesis on schedule four months later, never having missed a
deadline (though most chapters were completed within mere minutes of
being due). It is instructive that this incentive scheme worked even though
David’s monetary incentive from the university was greater than $100 a
month, just from the retirement contribution alone.
The scheme worked because the pain of having Thaler cash the check
and consume some good wine without him was more salient than the
rather abstract and pallid forgone contribution to his retirement savings
plan. Many of Thaler’s friends have threatened to go into business competing with him on this incentive plan, though Thaler points out that in
order to go into this business, you have to be known as a big enough jerk
actually to cash the check.
Sometimes friends can adopt such betting strategies together. John Romalis and Dean Karlan, two economists, adopted an ingenious arrangement for weight loss. When John and Dean were in graduate school in
economics, they noticed that they were putting on weight, especially during the period when they were on the job market and being wined and
dined by potential employers. They made a pact. Each agreed to lose thirty
pounds over a period of nine months. If either failed, he had to pay the
other $10,000. The bet was a big success; both met their target. They then
turned to the more difficult problem of keeping the weight off. The rules
they adopted were that on one day’s notice, either one could call for a
46 HUMANS AND ECONS
weigh-in. If either was found to be over the target weight, he would have
to pay the other an agreed sum. In four years, there were several weigh-ins,
and only once was either one over target (the resulting fine was paid in full
immediately). Notice that as in the case of David’s thesis bet, Dean and
John were acknowledging that without the bet to encourage them, they
would have eaten too much, even though they still would have wanted to
lose the weight.
More formal versions of these strategies are easy to imagine. In Chapter
16 we will encounter the Web site Stickk.com (of which Karlan is a cofounder), which gives people a method by which their Planners can constrain their Doers. In some situations, people may even want the government to help them deal with their self-control problems. In extreme cases,
governments might ban some items (such as heroin use, prostitution, and
drunken driving). Such bans can be seen as pure rather than libertarian paternalism, though third-party interests are also at stake. In other cases, individuals may prefer a less intrusive role for the government. For example,
smokers might benefit from cigarette taxes, which discourage consumption
without forbidding it.3 Also, some states have attempted to help gamblers
by creating a mechanism by which they can put themselves on a list of people who are banned from casinos (again see Chapter 16 for details). Since no
one is required to sign up, and since a refusal to do so is close to costless, this
approach really can be counted as libertarian as we understand the term.
One interesting example of a government-imposed self-control strategy
is daylight saving time (or summer time, as it is called in many parts of the
world). Surveys reveal that most people think that daylight saving time is a
great idea, primarily because they enjoy the “extra” hour of daylight during the evening. Of course, the number of daylight hours on a given day is
fixed, and setting the clocks ahead one hour does nothing to increase the
amount of daylight. The simple change of the labels on the hours of the
day, calling “six o’clock” by the name “seven o’clock,” nudges us all into
waking up an hour earlier. Along with having more time to enjoy an
evening softball game, we end up saving energy too. Historical note: the
idea was first suggested by Benjamin Franklin during his tenure as an
American delegate in Paris. A well-known skinflint, Franklin calculated
that thousands of pounds of candle wax could be saved with his idea.
However, the idea did not catch on until World War I.
RESISTING TEMPTATION 47
In many cases, markets provide self-control services, and government is
not needed at all. Companies can make a lot of money by strengthening
Planners in their battle with Doers, often doing well by doing good. An interesting example is a distinctive financial services institution that used to
be quite popular: the Christmas savings club. Here is how a Christmas club
typically works. In November (around Thanksgiving) a customer opens an
account at her local bank and commits herself to depositing a given
amount (say $10) each week for the next year. Funds cannot be withdrawn
until a year later, when the total amount is redeemed, just in time for the
Christmas shopping season. The usual interest rate on these accounts is
close to zero.
Think about the Christmas club in economic terms. This is an account
with no liquidity (you can’t take your money out for a year), high transaction costs (you have to make deposits every week), and a near-zero rate of
return. It is an easy homework exercise in an economics class to prove that
such an institution cannot exist. Yet for many years Christmas clubs were
widely used, with billions of dollars in investments. If we realize that we are
dealing with Humans rather than Econs, it is not hard to explain why the
clubs flourished. Households lacking enough money for Christmas giving
would resolve to solve the problem next year by joining a Christmas club.
The inconvenience of making the deposits and the loss of money paid in
interest would be small prices to pay in return for the assurance of having
enough money to buy gifts. And think back to Ulysses, tying himself to the
mast—the fact that money could not be withdrawn was a plus, not a minus. The absence of liquidity was precisely the point. Christmas clubs are
in many ways an adult version of a child’s piggy bank, designed to make it
easier to put money in than to take money out. The fact that it is hard to
withdraw money is entirely the point of the device.
While Christmas clubs still exist, they have been made unnecessary for
most households by the advent of credit cards.* Since Christmas shopping
can now be financed, households no longer find it necessary to save up in
48 HUMANS AND ECONS
*Although Christmas clubs have become unpopular, most Americans still make use
of a non–interest bearing savings vehicle that might be called the Easter account.
Three-quarters of Americans get refunds when they file their tax return, with the average refund being more than two thousand dollars. If these refunds were described as
interest-free loans to the government, they would probably not be so popular. Al-
advance. This is not to say, of course, that the new regime is in all respects
better. Saving at a zero percent interest rate with no opportunity to withdraw the funds may seem dumb, and it is clearly worse than just depositing
the money into an interest-bearing account, but earning a zero interest
rate may well be preferable to paying 18 percent or more on credit card
debt.
The market battle between credit cards and Christmas clubs is a good illustration of a more general point, one to which we will return. Markets
provide strong incentives for firms to cater to the demands of consumers,
and firms will compete to meet those demands, whether or not those demands represent the wisest choices. One firm might devise a clever selfcontrol device such as a Christmas club, but that firm cannot prevent another firm from offering to lend people money in anticipation of the
receipts of those funds. Credit cards and Christmas clubs compete, and indeed both are offered by the same institutions—banks. While competition
does drive down prices, it does not always lead to an outcome that is best
for consumers.
Even when we’re on our way to making good choices, competitive markets find ways to get us to overcome our last shred of resistance to bad
ones. At O’Hare Airport in Chicago, two food vendors compete across the
aisle from each other. One sells fruit, yogurt, and other healthy foods. The
other sells Cinnabons, sinful cinnamon buns that have a whopping 730
calories and 24 grams of fat. Your Planner may have set the course for the
yogurt and fruit stand, but the Cinnabon outlet blasts the aromas from
their ovens directly into the walkway in front of the store. Care to guess
which of the two stores always has the longer line?
Mental Accounting
Alarm clocks and Christmas clubs are external devices people use
to solve their self-control problems. Another way to approach these problems is to adopt internal control systems, otherwise known as mental acRESISTING TEMPTATION 49
though taxpayers could adjust their withholding rates to reduce the size of their refund, and in principle could earn interest on these funds throughout the year, many
prefer to get the refund as a way of being forced to save. When the refund comes, it
feels like a windfall.
counting. Mental accounting is the system (sometimes implicit) that households use to evaluate, regulate, and process their home budget. Almost all
of us use mental accounts, even if we’re not aware that we’re doing so.
The concept is beautifully illustrated by an exchange between the actors
Gene Hackman and Dustin Hoffman in one of those extra features offered
on dvds. Hackman and Hoffman were friends back in their starving artist
days, and Hackman tells the story of visiting Hoffman’s apartment and
having his host ask him for a loan. Hackman agreed to the loan, but then
they went into Hoffman’s kitchen, where several mason jars were lined up
on the counter, each containing money. One jar was labeled “rent,” another “utilities,” and so forth. Hackman asked why, if Hoffman had so
much money in jars, he could possibly need a loan, whereupon Hoffman
pointed to the food jar, which was empty.
According to economic theory (and simple logic), money is “fungible,”
meaning that it doesn’t come with labels. Twenty dollars in the rent jar
can buy just as much food as the same amount in the food jar. But households adopt mental accounting schemes that violate fungibility for the
same reasons that organizations do: to control spending. Most organizations have budgets for various activities, and anyone who has ever worked
in such an organization has experienced the frustration of not being able
to make an important purchase because the relevant account is already depleted. The fact that there is unspent money in another account is considered no more relevant than the money sitting in the rent jar on Dustin
Hoffman’s kitchen counter.
At the household level, violations of fungibility are everywhere. One of
the most creative examples of mental accounting was invented by a finance
professor we know. At the beginning of each year, he designates a certain
amount of money (say $2,000) as his intended gift to the United Way
charity. Then if anything bad happens to him during the year—a parking
ticket, for example—he mentally deducts the fine against the United Way
gift. This provides him “insurance” against minor financial mishaps.*
You can also see mental accounting in action at the casino. Watch a gambler who is lucky enough to win some money early in the evening. You
50 HUMANS AND ECONS
*You might think that this deprives the United Way of money, but not so. The professor has to make sure his intended gift is large enough to cover all his mishaps.
might see him take the money he has won and put it into one pocket and
put the money he brought with him to gamble that evening (yet another
mental account) into a different pocket. Gamblers even have a term for
this. The money that has recently been won is called “house money” because in gambling parlance the casino is referred to as the house. Betting
some of the money that you have just won is referred to as “gambling with
the house’s money,” as if it were, somehow, different from some other
kind of money. Experimental evidence reveals that people are more willing
to gamble with money that they consider house money.4
This same mentality affects people who never gamble. When investments pay off, people are willing to take big chances with their “winnings.” For example, mental accounting contributed to the large increase
in stock prices in the 1990s, as many people took on more and more risk
with the justification that they were playing only with their gains from the
past few years. Similarly, people are far more likely to splurge impulsively
on a big luxury purchase when they receive an unexpected windfall than
with savings that they have accumulated over time, even if those savings
are fully available to be spent.
Mental accounting matters precisely because the accounts are treated as
nonfungible. True, the mason jars used by Dustin Hoffman (and his parents’ generation) have largely disappeared. But many households continue
to designate accounts for various uses: children’s education, vacations, retirement, and so forth. In many cases these are literally different accounts,
as opposed to entries in a ledger. The sanctity of these accounts can lead to
seemingly bizarre behavior, such as simultaneously borrowing and lending
at very different rates. David Gross and Nick Souleles (2002) found that
the typical household in their sample had more than $5,000 in liquid assets
(typically in savings accounts earning less than 5 percent a year) and nearly
$3,000 in credit card balances, carrying a typical interest rate of 18 percent
or more. Using the money from the savings account to pay off the credit
card debt amounts to what economists call an arbitrage opportunity—
buying low and selling high—but the vast majority of households fail to
take advantage.
Just as with Christmas clubs, though, this behavior might not be as stupid as it looks. Many of these households have borrowed up to the limits
that their credit cards set. They may realize that if they paid off the credit
RESISTING TEMPTATION 51
card debt from the savings account, they would soon run up the cards to
their limits once again. (And credit card companies, fully aware of this, are
often more than willing to extend more credit to those who have reached
the limit, as long as they aren’t yet falling behind on interest payments.)
Keeping the money in the separate accounts is thus another costly selfcontrol strategy, just like the Christmas club.
Of course, many people do not suffer from an inability to save. Some
people actually have trouble spending. If their problem is extreme, we call
such people misers, but even regular folks can find that they don’t give themselves enough treats. We have a friend named Dennis who has adopted a
clever mental accounting strategy to deal with this problem. When Dennis
turned sixty-five, he started collecting Social Security payments, although
both he and his wife continue to work full-time. Since he has been a good
saver over the years (in part because his employer has a mandatory and
generous retirement plan), Dennis wanted to be sure he would do the
things he enjoys (especially trips to Paris with lots of eating) now while he
is still healthy, and not be put off by the expense. So he opened a special
savings account for his Social Security checks and has designated the
money in this account as a “fun account.” A fancy new bike or a case of
good wine would be acceptable purchases from this account, but a repair
to the roof would certainly not.
For each of us, using mental accounts can be extremely valuable. They
make life both more fun and more secure. Many of us could benefit from a
near-sacrosanct “rainy day” account and from a freely available “entertainment and fun” account. Understanding mental accounts would also improve public policy. As we will see, if we want to encourage savings, it will
be important to direct the increased savings into a mental (or real) account
where spending it will not be too big a temptation.
52 HUMANS AND ECONS
53
The Reverend Jim Jones was the founder and leader of the People’s Temple. In 1978 Jones, facing charges of tax evasion, moved most of
his one thousand followers from San Francisco to a small settlement in
Guyana, which he named Jonestown. Facing a federal investigation for reported acts of child abuse and torture, Jones decided that his followers
should poison their children and then themselves. They prepared vats of
poison. A few people resisted; a few others shouted out their protest, but
they were silenced. Following Jones’s orders, and the social pressures imposed by one another, mothers and fathers duly poisoned their children.
Then they poisoned themselves. Their bodies were found arm in arm, lying together.1
Econs (and some economists we know) are pretty unsociable creatures.
They communicate with others if they can gain something from the encounter, they care about their reputations, and they will learn from others
if actual information can be obtained, but Econs are not followers of fashion. Their hemlines would not go up and down except for practical reasons, and ties, if they existed at all in a world of Econs, would not grow
narrower and wider simply as a matter of style. (By the way, ties were originally used as napkins; they actually had a function.) Humans, on the other
hand, are frequently nudged by other Humans. Sometimes massive social
changes, in markets and politics alike, start with a small social nudge.
Humans are not exactly lemmings, but they are easily influenced by the
statements and deeds of others. (Again by the way, lemmings do not really
3
FOLLOWING THE HERD
commit mass suicide by following one another into the ocean. Our widely
shared and somewhat defamatory beliefs about lemmings are based on an
all-too-human urban legend—that is, people believe this because they are
following other people. By contrast, the tale of mass suicide at Jonestown
is no legend.) If you see a movie scene in which people are smiling, you are
more likely to smile yourself (whether or not the movie is funny); yawns
are contagious, too. Conventional wisdom has it that if two people live together for a long time, they start to look like each other. This bit of folk
wisdom turns out to be true. (For the curious: they grow to look alike
partly because of nutrition—shared diets and eating habits—but much of
the effect is simple imitation of facial expressions.) In fact couples who end
up looking alike also tend to be happier!
In this chapter, we try to understand how and why social influences
work. An understanding of those influences is important in our context for
two reasons. First, most people learn from others. This is usually good, of
course. Learning from others is how individuals and societies develop. But
many of our biggest misconceptions also come from others. When social
influences have caused people to have false or biased beliefs, then some
nudging may help. The second reason why this topic is important for our
purposes is that one of the most effective ways to nudge (for good or evil)
is via social influence. In Jonestown, that influence was so strong that an
entire population committed suicide. But social influences have also created miracles, large and small. In many cities, including ours, dog owners
now carry plastic bags when they walk their dogs, and strolling through
the park has become much more pleasant as a result. This has happened
even though the risk of being fined for unclean dog walking is essentially
zero. Choice architects need to know how to encourage other socially
beneficial behavior, and also how to discourage events like the one that occurred in Jonestown.
Social influences come in two basic categories. The first involves information. If many people do something or think something, their actions
and their thoughts convey information about what might be best for you
to do or think. The second involves peer pressure. If you care about what
other people think about you (perhaps in the mistaken belief that they are
paying some attention to what you are doing—see below), then you
might go along with the crowd to avoid their wrath or curry their favor.
54 HUMANS AND ECONS
For a quick glance at the power of social nudges, consider just a few research findings:
1. Teenage girls who see that other teenagers are having children are more
likely to become pregnant themselves.*
2. Obesity is contagious. If your best friends get fat, your risk of gaining
weight goes up.
3. Broadcasters mimic one another, producing otherwise inexplicable fads
in programming. (Think reality television, American Idol and its siblings, game shows that come and go, the rise and fall and rise of science
fiction, and so forth.)
4. The academic effort of college students is influenced by their peers, so
much so that the random assignments of first-year students to dormitories or roommates can have big consequences for their grades and
hence on their future prospects. (Maybe parents should worry less
about which college their kids go to and more about which roommate
they get.)
5. Federal judges on three-judge panels are affected by the votes of their
colleagues. The typical Republican appointee shows pretty liberal voting patterns when sitting with two Democratic appointees, and the typical Democratic appointee shows pretty conservative voting patterns
when sitting with two Republican appointees. Both sets of appointees
show far more moderate voting patterns when they are sitting with
at least one judge appointed by a president of the opposing political
party.2
The bottom line is that Humans are easily nudged by other Humans.
Why? One reason is that we like to conform.
Doing What Others Do
Imagine that you find yourself in a group of six people, engaged in
a test of visual perception. You are given a ridiculously simple task. You are
FOLLOWING THE HERD 55
*For this and all the other examples, we leave out the implied phrase “holding everything else constant.” So what we mean here is that controlling for other risk factors that
predict teenage pregnancy, girls are more likely to get pregnant if they see other girls
doing so.
supposed to match a particular line, shown on a large white card, to the
one of three comparison lines, projected onto a screen, that is identical to
it in length.
In the first three rounds of this test, everything proceeds smoothly and
easily. People make their matches aloud, in sequence, and everyone agrees
with everyone else. But on the fourth round, something odd happens. The
five other people in the group announce their matches before you—and
every one makes an obvious error. It is now time for you to make your announcement. What will you do?
If you are like most people, you think it is easy to predict your behavior
in this task: You will say exactly what you think. You’ll call it as you see it.
You are independent-minded and so you will tell the truth. But if you are
a Human, and you really participated in the experiment, you might well
follow those who preceded you, and say what they say, thus defying the evidence of your own senses.
In the 1950s Solomon Asch (1995), a brilliant social psychologist, conducted a series of experiments in just this vein. When asked to decide on
their own, without seeing judgments from others, people almost never
erred, since the test was easy. But when everyone else gave an incorrect
answer, people erred more than one-third of the time. Indeed, in a series
of twelve questions, nearly three-quarters of people went along with
the group at least once, defying the evidence of their own senses. Notice
that in Asch’s experiment, people were responding to the decisions of
strangers, whom they would probably never see again. They had no particular reason to want those strangers to like them.
Asch’s findings seem to capture something universal about humanity.
Conformity experiments have been replicated and extended in more than
130 experiments from seventeen countries, including Zaire, Germany,
France, Japan, Norway, Lebanon, and Kuwait (Sunstein, 2003). The overall pattern of errors—with people conforming between 20 and 40 percent
of the time—does not show huge differences across nations. And though
20 to 40 percent of the time might not seem large, remember that this task
was very simple. It is almost as if people can be nudged into identifying a
picture of a dog as a cat as long as other people before them have done so.
Why, exactly, do people sometimes ignore the evidence of their own
senses? We have already sketched the two answers. The first involves the in56 HUMANS AND ECONS
formation conveyed by people’s answers; the second involves peer pressure and the desire not to face the disapproval of the group. In Asch’s own
studies, several of the conformists said, in private interviews, that their initial perceptions must have been wrong. If everyone in the room accepts a
certain proposition, or sees things in a certain way, you might conclude
that they are probably right. Remarkably, recent brain-imaging work has
suggested that when people conform in Asch-like settings, they actually
see the situation as everyone else does.3
On the other hand, social scientists generally find less conformity, in the
same basic circumstances as Asch’s experiments, when people are asked to
give anonymous answers. People become more likely to conform when
they know that other people will see what they have to say. Sometimes people will go along with the group even when they think, or know, that
everyone else has blundered. Unanimous groups are able to provide the
strongest nudges—even when the question is an easy one, and people
ought to know that everyone else is wrong.
Asch’s experiments involved evaluations with pretty obvious answers.
Most of the time, it isn’t hard to assess the length of lines. What if the task
is made a bit more difficult? The question is especially important for our
purposes, because we are particularly interested in how people are influenced, or can be influenced, in dealing with problems that are both hard
and unfamiliar. Some key studies were undertaken in the 1930s by the
psychologist Muzafer Sherif (1937). In Sherif’s experiment, people were
placed in a dark room, and a small pinpoint of light was positioned at some
distance in front of them. The light was actually stationary, but because of
a perceptual illusion called the autokinetic effect, it appeared to move. On
each of several trials, Sherif asked people to estimate the distance that the
light had moved. When polled individually, subjects did not agree with
one another, and their answers varied significantly from one trial to another. This is not surprising; because the light did not move, any judgment
about distance was a stab in the literal dark.
But Sherif found big conformity effects when people were asked to act
in small groups and to make their estimates in public. Here the individual
judgments converged and a group norm, establishing the consensus distance, quickly developed. Over time, the norm remained stable within particular groups, thus leading to a situation in which different groups made,
FOLLOWING THE HERD 57
and were strongly committed to, quite different judgments. There is an
important clue here about how seemingly similar groups, cities, and even
nations can converge on very different beliefs and actions simply because
of modest and even arbitrary variations in starting points.
Sherif also tried a nudge. In some experiments, he added a confederate—his own ally, unbeknownst to the people in the study. When he did
that, something else happened. If the confederate spoke confidently and
firmly, his judgment had a strong influence on the group’s assessment. If
the confederate’s estimate was much higher than those initially made by
others, the group’s judgment would be inflated; if the confederate’s estimate was very low, the group’s estimate would fall. A little nudge, if it was
expressed confidently, could have major consequences for the group’s
conclusion. The clear lesson here is that consistent and unwavering people, in the private or public sector, can move groups and practices in their
preferred direction.
More remarkable still, the group’s judgments became thoroughly internalized, so that people would adhere to them even when reporting on
their own—indeed even a year later, and even when participating in new
groups whose members offered different judgments. Significantly, the initial judgments were also found to have effects across “generations.” Even
when enough fresh subjects were introduced and others retired so that all
the participants were new to the situation, the original group judgment
tended to stick, although the person who was originally responsible for it
had been long gone.4 In a series of experiments, people using Sherif’s basic method have shown that an arbitrary “tradition,” in the form of some
judgment about the distance, can become entrenched over time, so that
many people follow it notwithstanding its original arbitrariness.5
We can see here why many groups fall prey to what is known as “collective conservatism”: the tendency of groups to stick to established patterns
even as new needs arise. Once a practice (like wearing ties) has become established, it is likely to be perpetuated, even if there is no particular basis
for it. Sometimes a tradition can last for a long time, and receive support or
at least acquiescence from large numbers of people, even though it was
originally the product of a small nudge from a few people or perhaps even
one. Of course, a group will shift if it can be shown that the practice is caus58 HUMANS AND ECONS
ing serious problems. But if there is uncertainty on that question, people
might well continue doing what they have always done.
An important problem here is “pluralistic ignorance”—that is, ignorance, on the part of all or most, about what other people think. We may
follow a practice or a tradition not because we like it, or even think it defensible, but merely because we think that most other people like it. Many
social practices persist for this reason, and a small shock, or nudge, can dislodge them.6 A dramatic example is communism in the former Soviet bloc,
which lasted in part because people were unaware how many people despised the regime. Dramatic but less world-historical changes, rejecting
long-standing practices, can often be produced by a nudge that starts a
kind of bandwagon effect.
Additional experiments, growing out of Asch’s basic method, find large
conformity effects for judgments of many different kinds.7 Consider the
following finding. People were asked, “Which one of the following do
you feel is the most important problem facing our country today?” Five alternatives were offered: economic recession, educational facilities, subversive activities, mental health, and crime and corruption. Asked privately, a
mere 12 percent chose subversive activities. But when exposed to an apparent group consensus unanimously selecting that option, 48 percent of
people made the same choice!
In a similar finding, people were asked to consider this statement: “Free
speech being a privilege rather than a right, it is proper for a society to suspend free speech when it feels threatened.” Asked this question individually, only 19 percent of the control group agreed, but confronted with the
shared opinion of only four others, 58 percent of people agreed. These results are closely connected with one of Asch’s underlying interests, which
was to understand how Nazism had been possible. Asch believed that conformity could produce a very persistent nudge, ultimately generating behavior (such as the events in Jonestown) that might seem unthinkable.
Whether or not Asch’s work provides an adequate account of the rise
of fascism, or the events in Jonestown, there is no question that social
pressures nudge people to accept some pretty odd conclusions—and
those conclusions might well affect their behavior. An obvious question is
whether choice architects can exploit this fact to move people in better diFOLLOWING THE HERD 59
rections. Suppose, for example, that a city is trying to encourage people to
exercise more, so as to improve their health. If many people are exercising,
the city might be able to produce significant changes simply by mentioning that fact. A few influential people, offering strong signals about appropriate behavior, can have a similar effect.
Consider Texas’s imaginative and stunningly successful effort to reduce
littering on its highways.8 Texas officials were enormously frustrated by
the failure of their well-funded and highly publicized advertising campaigns, which attempted to convince people that it was their civic duty to
stop littering. Many of the litterers were men between the ages of eighteen
and twenty-four, who were not exactly impressed by the idea that a bureaucratic elite wanted them to change their behavior. Public officials decided that they needed “a tough-talking slogan that would also address the
unique spirit of Texas pride.” Explicitly targeting the unresponsive audience, the state enlisted popular Dallas Cowboys football players to participate in television ads in which they collected litter, smashed beer cans in
their bare hands, and growled, “Don’t mess with Texas!” Other spots included popular singers, such as Willie Nelson.
People can now get all kinds of “Don’t Mess with Texas” products,
from decals to shirts to coffee mugs. One popular decal offers patriotic colors, reflecting both the U.S. flag, and—perhaps more important—the
Texas flag (Figure 3.1)!
About 95 percent of Texans now know this slogan, and in 2006 “Don’t
Mess with Texas” was voted America’s favorite slogan by a landslide and
was honored with a parade down New York City’s Madison Avenue. (We
are not making this up. Only in America, to be sure.) More to the point:
Within the first year of the campaign, litter in the state had been reduced
by a remarkable 29 percent. In its first six years, there was a 72 percent reduction in visible roadside litter. All this happened not through mandates,
threats, or coercion but through a creative nudge.
The Spotlight Effect
One reason why people expend so much effort conforming to social norms and fashions is that they think that others are closely paying attention to what they are doing. If you wear a suit to a social event where
60 HUMANS AND ECONS
everyone else has gone casual, you feel like everyone is looking at you
funny and wondering why you are such a geek. If you are subject to such
fears, here is a possibly comforting thought: they aren’t really paying as
much attention to you as you think.
Tom Gilovich and his colleagues have demonstrated that people fall
prey to what he calls the “spotlight effect.”9 In a typical experiment, Gilovich’s team started by doing some research about which entertainer would
be most unhip to display on the front of a T-shirt. This research was conducted in the late 1990s, and the winner of this dubious honor was the
singer Barry Manilow. When a student arrived for the experiment, he was
told to put on a T-shirt with Barry Manilow’s picture prominently displayed on the front. The student was then asked to join another group of
students who were busy filling out questionnaires. After a minute or so,
the experimenter returned, and told the student wearing the T-shirt that
he now realized he wanted him to participate in a different study. The student and the experimenter then left the room. At this point the student
was asked to guess how many of the other students in the room would be
able to identify who was on his T-shirt. The average guess was a bit less
then half, 46 percent. In fact, only 21 percent of the group could say who
was pictured on his T-shirt.
FOLLOWING THE HERD 61
3.1
Don’t Mess with Texas logo (Used with permission of Don’t Mess with Texas, Texas
Department of Transportation)
The moral is that people are paying less attention to you than you believe. If you have a stain on your shirt, don’t worry, they probably won’t
notice. But in part because people do think that everyone has their eyes
fixed on them, they conform to what they think people expect.
Cultural Change, Political Change, and Unpredictability
Might culture and politics be affected by conformity? Might companies be able to make money by enlisting conformity? Consider some evidence involving music downloads. Matthew Salganik and his coauthors
(2006) created an artificial music market, with 14,341 participants who
were visitors to a Web site popular with young people. The participants
were given a list of previously unknown songs from unknown bands. They
were asked to listen to a brief selection of any songs that interested them,
to decide which songs (if any) to download, and to assign a rating to the
songs they chose. About half of the participants were asked to make their
decisions independently, based on the names of the bands and the songs
and their own judgment about the quality of the music. The other half
could see how many times each song had been downloaded by other participants. Each participant in this second group was also randomly assigned to one or another of eight possible “worlds,” each of which evolved
on its own; those in any particular world could see only the downloads in
their own world. A key question was whether people would be affected by
the choices of others—and whether different music would become popular in the different “worlds.”
Were people nudged by what other people did? There is not the slightest doubt. In all eight worlds, individuals were far more likely to download
songs that had been previously downloaded in significant numbers, and far
less likely to download songs that had not been as popular. Most strikingly,
the success of songs was quite unpredictable, and the songs that did well or
poorly in the control group, where people did not see other people’s judgments, could perform very differently in the “social influence worlds.” In
those worlds, most songs could become popular or unpopular, with much
depending on the choices of the first downloaders. The identical song
could be a hit or a failure simply because other people, at the start, were
seen to choose to have downloaded it or not.
62 HUMANS AND ECONS
In many domains people are tempted to think, after the fact, that an
outcome was entirely predictable, and that the success of a musician, an actor, an author, or a politician was inevitable in light of his of her skills and
characteristics. Beware of that temptation. Small interventions and even
coincidences, at a key stage, can produce large variations in the outcome.
Today’s hot singer is probably indistinguishable from dozens and even
hundreds of equally talented performers whose names you’ve never heard.
We can go further. Most of today’s governors are hard to distinguish from
dozens or even hundreds of politicians whose candidacies badly fizzled.
The effects of social influences may or may not be deliberately planned by
particular people. For a vivid and somewhat hilarious example of how social
influences can affect beliefs even if no one plans anything, consider the
Seattle Windshield Pitting Epidemic.10 In late March 1954, a group of people in Bellingham, Washington, noticed some tiny holes, or pits, on their
windshields. Local police speculated that the pits had resulted from the actions of vandals, using BBs or buckshot. Soon thereafter, a few people in
cities south of Bellingham reported similar damage to their windshields.
Within two weeks, the apparent work of vandals had gone even farther
south, to the point where two thousand cars were reported as damaged—
these evidently not the work of vandals. The threat approached Seattle. The
Seattle newspapers duly reported the risk in mid-April, and soon thereafter,
several reports of windshield pits came to the attention of local police.
Before long those reports reached epidemic proportions, leading to intense speculation about what on earth, or elsewhere, could possibly be the
cause. Geiger counters found no radioactivity. Some people thought that
some odd atmospheric event must have been responsible; others invoked
sound waves and a possible shift in the earth’s magnetic field; still others
pointed to cosmic rays from the sun. By April 16 no fewer than three thousand windshields in the Seattle area were reported to have been “pitted,”
and Seattle’s mayor promptly wrote the governor and President Eisenhower: “What appeared to be a localized outbreak of vandalism in damaged auto windshields and windows in the northern part of Washington
State has now spread throughout the Puget Sound area. . . . Urge appropriate federal (and state) agencies be instructed to cooperate with local authorities on emergency basis.” In response, the governor created a committee of scientists to investigate this ominous and startling phenomenon.
FOLLOWING THE HERD 63
Their conclusion? The damage, such as it was, was probably “the result
of normal driving conditions in which small objects strike the windshields
of cars.” A later investigation, supporting the scientists’ conclusion, found
that brand new cars lacked pits. The eventual judgment was that the pits
“had been there all along, but no one had noticed them until now.” (You
might have a look at your car right now; if you’ve had it for a while, there’s
probably a pit, or two, or more.)
The Seattle Windshield Pitting Epidemic was an extreme example of unintentional social nudging, but every day we are influenced by people who
are not trying to influence us. Most of us are affected by the eating habits
of our eating companions, whatever their intentions. As we have said, obesity is contagious; you’re more likely to be overweight if you have a lot of
overweight friends. An especially good way to gain weight is to have dinner with other people.11 On average, those who eat with one other person
eat about 35 percent more than they do when they are alone; members of
a group of four eat about 75 percent more; those in groups of seven or
more eat 96 percent more.*
We are also greatly influenced by consumption norms within the relevant group. A light eater eats much more in a group of heavy eaters. A
heavy eater will show more restraint in a light-eating group. The group average thus exerts a significant influence. But there are gender differences as
well. Women often eat less on dates; men tend to eat a lot more, apparently
with the belief that women are impressed by a lot of manly eating. (Note
to men: they aren’t.) So if you want to lose some weight, look for a thin
colleague to go to lunch with (and don’t finish the food on her plate).
If you find yourself nudged by your friends’ eating choices, it is unlikely
to be because one or another friend decided to nudge you. At the same
time, social influences are often used strategically. In particular, advertisers
are entirely aware of the power of social influences. Frequently they emphasize that “most people prefer” their own product, or that “growing
numbers of people” are switching from another brand, which was yester64 HUMANS AND ECONS
*A colleague who raises chickens tells us that they behave the same way. A chicken
who has already eaten enough to feel sated will start eating again if a hungry chicken is
brought into the next cage.
day’s news, to their own, which represents the future. They try to nudge
you by telling you what most people are now doing.
Candidates for public office, or political parties, do the same thing; they
emphasize that “most people are turning to” their preferred candidates,
hoping that the very statement can make itself true. Nothing is worse than
a perception that voters are leaving a candidate in droves. Indeed, a perception of that kind helped to account for the Democratic nomination of
John Kerry in 2004. When Democrats shifted from Howard Dean to John
Kerry, it was not because each Democratic voter made an independent
judgment on Kerry’s behalf. It was in large part because of a widespread
perception that other people were flocking to Kerry. Duncan Watts’s amusing account (2004) is worth quoting at length:
A few weeks before the Iowa caucuses, Kerry’s campaign seemed
dead, but then he unexpectedly won Iowa, then New Hampshire,
and then primary after primary. How did this happen? . . . When
everyoneis looking to someone else for an opinion—trying, for example, to pick the Democratic candidate they think everyone else
will pick—it’s possible that whatever information other people
might have gets lost, and instead we get a cascade of imitation
that, like a stampeding herd, can start for no apparent reason and
subsequently go in any direction with equal likelihood. . . . We
think of ourselves as autonomous individuals, each driven by our
internal abilities and desires and therefore solely responsible for
our own behavior, particularly when it comes to voting. No voter
ever admits—even to herself—that she chose Kerry because he
won New Hampshire.
Social Nudges as Choice Architecture
The general lesson is clear. If choice architects want to shift behavior and to do so with a nudge, they might simply inform people about
what other people are doing. Sometimes the practices of others are surprising, and hence people are much affected by learning what they are.
Consider four examples.
FOLLOWING THE HERD 65
Conformity and Tax Compliance
In the context of tax compliance, a real-world experiment conducted by officials in Minnesota produced big changes in behavior.12
Groups of taxpayers were given four kinds of information. Some were told
that their taxes went to various good works, including education, police
protection, and fire protection. Others were threatened with information
about the risks of punishment for noncompliance. Others were given information about how they might get help if they were confused or uncertain about how to fill out their tax forms. Still others were just told that
more than 90 percent of Minnesotans already complied, in full, with their
obligations under the tax law.
Only one of these interventions had a significant effect on tax compliance, and it was the last. Apparently some taxpayers are more likely to violate the law because of a misperception—plausibly based on the availability of media or other accounts of cheaters—that the level of compliance is
pretty low. When informed that the actual compliance level is high, they
become less likely to cheat. It follows that either desirable or undesirable
behavior can be increased, at least to some extent, by drawing public attention to what others are doing. (Note to political parties: If you would
like to increase turnout, please do not lament the large numbers of people
who fail to vote.)*
Preserving Petrified Wood
In many contexts, of course, the incidence of undesirable behavior
is high. This unhappy fact seems to be a real obstacle to change: if people
follow one another, we might end up with a vicious cycle or even a spiral.
Is it nonetheless possible to nudge people in better directions?
An ingenious study suggests an affirmative answer, and it reinforces the
view that the specific framing of the problem can have a powerful effect.
The study was conducted in the Petrified Forest National Park in Arizona,
66 HUMANS AND ECONS
*In the same category is the finding that people are more likely to recycle if they
learn that lots of people are recycling. If a hotel wants people to reuse their towels, for
environmental or economic reasons, it would do well to emphasize that most other
guests are reusing their towels. The hotel would do even better to provide guests with
information about how responsible the previous guests in their room have been!
where some visitors like to take souvenir samples home with them, a practice that threatens the very existence of the park. Signs at the park implore
people not to take samples away. The question at issue is what the signs
should say. The investigators, led by Robert Cialdini, the great guru of social influence who is a professor down the road in Tempe, were pretty sure
that the signs currently being used in the park could be improved.13 So he
arranged an experiment.
In all the conditions of the experiment, pieces of petrified wood were
scattered along a trail, tempting visitors to take something with them. At
two-hour intervals, the language on the signs along the trail was varied.
Some signs, similar to those currently used in the park, stressed how bad
the problem was: “Many past visitors have removed the petrified wood
from the park, changing the natural state of the Petrified Forest.” Other
signs emphasized an injunctive norm: “Please don’t remove the petrified
wood from the park, in order to preserve the natural state of the Petrified
Forest.” Cialdini’s theory predicted that the positive, injunctive norm
would be more effective than the negative, informational one. This prediction was confirmed.14
Socializing Nondrinking
A related example is the “social norms” approach, which tries to
reduce drinking and other undesirable activities.15 Consider, for instance,
the problem of alcohol abuse by (mostly underage) college students. A
survey by the Harvard School of Public Health found that about 44 percent of college students engaged in binge drinking in the two-week period
preceding the survey.16 This is, of course, a problem, but a clue to how to
correct it lies in the fact that most students believe that alcohol abuse is far
more pervasive than it actually is.17
Misperceptions of this kind result in part from the availability heuristic.
Incidents of alcohol abuse are easily recalled, and the consequence is to
inflate perceptions. College students are influenced by their beliefs about
what other college students do, and hence alcohol abuse will inevitably increase if students have an exaggerated sense of how much other students
are drinking.
Alert to the possibility of changing behavior by emphasizing the statistical reality, many public officials have tried to nudge people in better direcFOLLOWING THE HERD 67
tions. Montana, for example, has adopted a large-scale educational campaign, one that has stressed the fact that strong majorities of citizens of
Montana do not drink.18 One advertisement attempts to correct misperceived norms on college campuses by asserting, “Most (81 percent) of
Montana college students have four or fewer alcoholic drinks each week.”
Montana applies the same approach to cigarette smoking with an advertisement suggesting that “Most (70 percent) of Montana teens are tobacco free.” The strategy has produced big improvements in the accuracy
of social perceptions and also statistically significant decreases in smoking.19
Smiles, Frowns, and Saving Energy
Social nudges can also be used to decrease energy use. To see how,
consider a study of the power of social norms, involving nearly three hundred households in San Marcos, California.20 All of the households were
informed about how much energy they had used in previous weeks; they
were also given (accurate) information about the average consumption of
energy by households in their neighborhood. The effects on behavior were
both clear and striking. In the following weeks, the above-average energy
users significantly decreased their energy use; the below-average energy
users significantly increased their energy use. The latter finding is called a
boomerang effect, and it offers an important warning. If you want to
nudge people into socially desirable behavior, do not, by any means, let
them know that their current actions are better than the social norm.
But here is an even more interesting finding. About half of the households were given not merely descriptive information but also a small, nonverbal signal that their energy consumption was socially approved or socially disapproved. More specifically those households that consumed
more than the norm received an unhappy “emoticon,” like Figure 3.2a,
whereas those that consumed less than the norm received a happy emoticon, like Figure 3.2b.
Unsurprisingly, but significantly, the big energy users showed an even
larger decrease when they received the unhappy emoticon. The more important finding was that when below-average energy users received the
happy emoticon, the boomerang effect completely disappeared! When
they were merely told that their energy use was below average, they felt
68 HUMANS AND ECONS
that they had some “room” to increase consumption, but when the informational message was combined with an emotional nudge, they didn’t adjust their use upward.
Many people, including Republicans and Democrats alike, are arguing
for energy conservation on grounds of national security, economic growth,
and environmental protection. To promote energy conservation, a great
deal can be done with well-chosen social nudges. We will have more to say
about how choice architecture can be used to help the environment later.
Priming
Thus far we have been focusing on people’s attention to the
thoughts and behavior of other people. Closely related work shows the
power of “priming.” Priming refers to the somewhat mysterious workings
of the Automatic System of the brain. Research shows that subtle influences can increase the ease with which certain information comes to mind.
Imagine playing a word-association game with Homer Simpson and you
will get the idea. Sometimes the merest hint of an idea or concept will trigger an association that can stimulate action. These “primes” occur in social
situations, and their effects can be surprisingly powerful.
In surveys, people are often asked whether they are likely to engage in
certain behavior—to vote, to lose weight, to purchase certain products.
Those who engage in surveys want to catalogue behavior, not to influence
FOLLOWING THE HERD 69
3.2
Visual feedback given to power customers in San Marcos, California
it. But social scientists have discovered an odd fact: when they measure
people’s intentions, they affect people’s conduct. The “mere-measurement effect” refers to the finding that when people are asked what they intend to do, they become more likely to act in accordance with their answers. This finding can be found in many contexts. If people are asked
whether they intend to eat certain foods, to diet, or to exercise, their answers to the questions will affect their behavior.21 In our parlance, the
mere-measurement effect is a nudge, and it can be used by private or public nudgers.
Campaign officials want to encourage their supporters to vote. How can
they do that? One obvious method is to emphasize the stakes; another is to
decrease the cost and burdens, by making it easier for people to get to the
polls. But there is another way. It turns out that if you ask people, the day before the election, whether they intend to vote, you can increase the probability of their voting by as much as 25 percent!22 Or suppose that the goal is
to increase new purchases of a certain product, such as cell phones or automobiles. A study of a nationally representative sample of more than forty
thousand people asked a simple question: Do you intend to buy a new car in
the next six months?23The very question increased purchase rates by 35 percent. Or suppose that an official wants to encourage people to take steps to
improve their own health. With respect to health-related behavior, significant changes have been produced by measuring people’s intentions.24 If
people are asked how often they expect to floss their teeth in the next week,
they floss more. If people are asked whether they intend to consume fatty
foods in the next week, they consume less in the way of fatty foods.
The nudge provided by asking people what they intend to do can be accentuated by asking them when and how they plan to do it. This insight
falls into the category of what the great psychologist Kurt Lewin called
“channel factors,” a term he used for small influences that could either facilitate or inhibit certain behaviors. Think about the “channel” as similar
to the path a river takes after the spring snow melt. The path can be determined by seemingly tiny changes in the landscape. For people, Lewin argued that similarly tiny factors can create surprisingly strong inhibitors to
behavior that people “want” to take. Often we can do more to facilitate
good behavior by removing some small obstacle than by trying to shove
people in a certain direction. An early illustration of Lewin’s idea was pro70 HUMANS AND ECONS
duced by Leventhal, Singer, and Jones (1965) on the campus of Yale University. The subjects were Yale seniors who were given some persuasive education about the risks of tetanus and the importance of going to the
health center to receive an inoculation. Most of the students were convinced by the lecture and said that they planned to go get the shot, but
these good intentions did not lead to much action. Only 3 percent actually
went and got the shot.
Other subjects were given the same lecture but were also given a copy of
a campus map with the location of the health center circled. They were
then asked to look at their weekly schedules, make a plan for when they
would go and get the shot, and look at the map and decide what route they
would take. With these nudges, 28 percent of the students managed to
show up and get their tetanus shot. Notice that this manipulation was very
subtle. The students were all seniors and surely knew where the health center was located (Yale is not a huge campus), and they were not given an actual appointment. Still, nine times as many students got shots, illustrating
the potential power of channel factors.
Slightly broadening these findings, social scientists have found that they
can “prime” people into certain forms of behavior by offering simple and
apparently irrelevant cues. It turns out that if certain objects are made visible and salient, people’s behavior can be affected. Objects characteristic of
business environments, such as briefcases and boardroom tables, make
people more competitive, less cooperative, and less generous.25 Smells
matter too: mere exposure to the scent of an all-purpose cleaner makes
people keep their environment cleaner while they eat.26 In both cases,
people were not consciously aware of the effect of the cue on their behavior. Or consider this one: people’s judgments about strangers are affected
by whether they are drinking iced coffee or hot coffee! Those given iced
coffee are more likely to see other people as more selfish, less sociable, and,
well, colder than those who are given hot coffee.27 This, too, happens
quite unconsciously.
The three social influences that we have emphasized—information,
peer pressure, and priming—can easily be enlisted by private and public
nudgers. As we will see, both business and governments can use the power
of social influence to promote many good (and bad) causes.
FOLLOWING THE HERD 71
4
WHEN DO WE NEED A NUDGE?
72
We have seen that people perform amazing feats but also commit
ditzy blunders. What’s the best response? Choice architecture and its effects cannot be avoided, and so the short answer is an obvious one, call it
the golden rule of libertarian paternalism: offer nudges that are most likely
to help and least likely to inflict harm.* A slightly longer answer is that people will need nudges for decisions that are difficult and rare, for which they
do not get prompt feedback, and when they have trouble translating aspects of the situation into terms that they can easily understand.
In this chapter we try to put some flesh on these points. We begin by
specifying the kinds of situations in which people are least likely to make
good choices. We then turn to questions about the potential magic of markets and ask whether and when free markets and open competition will
tend to exacerbate rather than mitigate the effects of human frailty. The
key point here is that for all their virtues, markets often give companies a
strong incentive to cater to (and profit from) human frailties, rather than
to try to eradicate them or to minimize their effects.
*Camerer et al. (2003) call for “asymmetric paternalism,” which they define as taking steps to help the least sophisticated people while imposing minimal harm on everyone else. Our golden rule is in the spirit of their formulation.
Fraught Choices
Suppose you are told that a group of people will have to make
some choice in the near future. You are the choice architect. You are trying
to decide how to design the choice environment, what kinds of nudges to
offer, and how subtle the nudges should be. What do you need to know to
design the best possible choice environment?
Benefits Now—Costs Later
We have seen that predictable problems arise when people must
make decisions that test their capacity for self-control. Many choices in life,
such as whether to wear a blue shirt or a white one, lack important selfcontrol elements. Self-control issues are most likely to arise when choices
and their consequences are separated in time. At one extreme are what
might be called investment goods, such as exercise, flossing, and dieting.
For these goods the costs are borne immediately, but the benefits are delayed. For investment goods, most people err on the side of doing too little. Although there are some exercise nuts and flossing freaks, it seems safe
to say that not many people are resolving on New Year’s Eve to floss less
next year and to stop using the exercise bike so much.
At the other extreme are what might be called sinful goods: smoking, alcohol, and jumbo chocolate doughnuts are in this category. We get the
pleasure now and suffer the consequences later. Again we can use the New
Year’s resolution test: how many people vow to smoke more cigarettes,
drink more martinis, or have more chocolate donuts in the morning next
year? Both investment goods and sinful goods are prime candidates for
nudges. Most (nonanorexic) people do not need any special encouragement to eat another brownie, but they could use some help exercising
more.
Degree of Difficulty
Nearly everyone over the age of six can tie shoelaces, play a respectable game of tic-tac-toe, and spell the word cat. But only a few of us
can tie a decent bow tie, play a masterly game of chess, or spell (much less
pronounce) the name of the psychologist Mihály Csíkszentmihályi. Of
course, we learn to cope with the harder problems. We can buy a pretied
WHEN DO WE NEED A NUDGE? 73
bow tie, read a book about chess, and look up the spelling of Csíkszentmihályi on the Web (then copy and paste every time we have to use the
name). We use spell checkers and spreadsheets to help with harder problems. But many problems in life are quite difficult, and often there is no
technology as easy as a spell checker available to help. We are more likely to
need more help picking the right mortgage than choosing the right loaf of
bread.
Frequency
Even hard problems become easier with practice. Both of us have
managed to learn how to serve a tennis ball into the service court with reasonable regularity (and in Sunstein’s case, even velocity), but it took some
time. The first time people try to execute this motion, they are lucky if the
ball goes over the net, much less into the service box. Practice makes perfect (or at least better).
Unfortunately, some of life’s most important decisions do not come
with many opportunities to practice. Most students choose a college only
once. Outside of Hollywood, most of us choose a spouse, well, not more
than two or three times. Few of us get to try many different careers. And
outside of science fiction, we get one chance to save for retirement
(though we can make some adjustments along the way). Generally, the
higher the stakes, the less often we are able to practice. Most of us buy
houses and cars not more than once or twice a decade, but we are really
practiced at grocery shopping. Most families have mastered the art of milk
inventory control, not by solving the relevant mathematical equation but
through trial and error.*
74 HUMANS AND ECONS
*There is a deep irony here. Many economists have dismissed psychology experiments on the grounds that the experiments are only for “low stakes” and that people
are often not given sufficient opportunities to learn. These economists argue that if the
stakes were raised, and subjects were given practice trials, then people would “get it
right.” There are at least two problems with this argument. First, there is little evidence
that performance improves when the stakes go up. To a first approximation, the stakes
just don’t seem to matter much (see Camerer and Hogarth, 1999). Second, and more
important, economics is supposed to help explain life’s big decisions, and these are the
decisions that come without many practice trials. There might be a lower divorce rate if
people had several “practice marriages” in their twenties and thirties before settling
down to the real thing (though we are not confident about that prediction), but the
None of this is to say that the government should be telling people
whom to marry or what to study. This is a book about libertarian paternalism. At this stage we just want to stress that rare, difficult choices are
good candidates for nudges.
Feedback
Even practice does not make perfect if people lack good opportunities for learning. Learning is most likely if people get immediate, clear
feedback after each try. Suppose you are practicing your putting skills on
the practice green. If you hit ten balls toward the same hole, it is easy to get
a sense of how hard you have to hit the ball. Even the least talented golfers
will soon learn to gauge distance under these circumstances. Suppose instead you were putting the golf balls but not getting to see where they
were going. In that environment, you could putt all day and never get any
better.
Alas, many of life’s choices are like practicing putting without being able
to see where the balls end up, and for one simple reason: the situation is
not structured to provide good feedback. For example, we usually get
feedback only on the options we select, not the ones we reject. Unless people go out of their way to experiment, they may never learn about alternatives to the familiar ones. If you take the long route home every night, you
may never learn there is a shorter one. Long-term processes rarely provide
good feedback. Someone can eat a high-fat diet for years without having
any warning signs until the heart attack. When feedback does not work, we
may benefit from a nudge.
Knowing What You Like
Most of us have a good sense of whether we prefer coffee ice
cream to vanilla, Frank Sinatra to Bob Dylan, and mysteries to science
fiction. These are examples for which we have had the time to sample the
alternatives and learn about our tastes. But suppose that you have to forecast your preferences for the unfamiliar, such as when dining for the first
WHEN DO WE NEED A NUDGE? 75
fact is that in real life choosing a life partner is hard and people often fail. Similarly, there
might be fewer philosophy Ph.D.’s driving cabs if choices about graduate school came
with practice trials, but at age thirty-five it is hard to ask for a “do-over.”
time in a country with an exotic cuisine. Smart tourists often rely on others (waiters, for example) for help: “Most foreigners like x and hate y.”
Even in less exotic locales, it can be smart to let someone else choose for
you. Two of the best restaurants in Chicago (Alinea and Charlie Trotter’s)
give their diners the fewest choices. At Alinea diners just decide whether
they want fifteen very small plates or twenty-five tiny ones. At Charlie
Trotter’s, the diner is asked only whether to limit the dining to vegetables
or not. (In both, one is asked about dietary restrictions and allergies.) The
benefit of having so little choice is that the chef is authorized to cook you
things you would never have thought to order.
It is particularly hard for people to make good decisions when they have
trouble translating the choices they face into the experiences they will
have. A simple example is ordering a dish from a menu in a language you
do not understand. But even when you do know the meaning of the words
being used, you may not be able to translate the alternatives you are considering into terms that make the slightest sense to you.
Take the problem of choosing a mutual fund for your retirement portfolio. Most investors (including us) would have trouble knowing how to
compare a “capital appreciation” fund with a “dynamic dividend” fund,
and even if the use of those words were made comprehensible, the problem would not be solved. What an investor needs to know is how a choice
between those funds affects her spending power during retirement under
various scenarios—something even an expert armed with a good software
package and complete knowledge of the portfolios held by each fund can
have trouble analyzing. The same problem arises for the choice among
health plans; we may have little understanding of the effects of our selection. If your daughter gets a rare disease, will she be able to see a good specialist? How long will she have to wait in line? When people have a hard
time predicting how their choices will end up affecting their lives, they
have less to gain by numerous options and perhaps even by choosing for
themselves. A nudge might be welcomed.
Markets: A Mixed Verdict
The discussion thus far suggests that people may most need a
good nudge for choices that have delayed effects; those that are difficult,
76 HUMANS AND ECONS
infrequent, and offer poor feedback; and those for which the relation between choice and experience is ambiguous. A natural question is whether
free markets can solve people’s problems, even under such circumstances.
Often market competition will do a lot of good. But in some cases, companies have a strong incentive to cater to people’s frailties and to exploit them.
Notice first that many insurance products have all of the fraught features
that we have sketched. The benefits from holding the insurance are delayed, the probability of having a claim is hard to analyze, consumers do
not get useful feedback on whether they are getting a good return on their
insurance purchases, and the mapping from what they are buying to what
they are getting can be ambiguous. But the insurance market is competitive, so a natural question to ask is whether market forces can be relied
upon to “solve” the problem of fraught choices.
Let’s imagine two different worlds. In one world, Econworld, all the
consumers are Econs and they have no problem with difficult choices. All
quantitative decisions, including insurance purchases, are a piece of cake
for them. (Econs are part actuary.) The other world is called Humanworld,
and in this world some of the consumers are Humans, who have all the
features that generally characterize the tribe, while the rest are Econs. In
both worlds, there are well-functioning markets and at least some perfectly
rational firms that have hired Econs as managers. The key question is
whether the insurance purchases in Humanworld will be the same as the
ones in Econworld. In other words, do well-functioning markets render
the humanness of the Humans irrelevant?
To analyze this question, let’s start with a simple example inspired by a
wonderful poem by Shel Silverstein (1974) entitled “Smart.” The poem is
fun as well as brilliant, so if you have a computer nearby, we suggest that
you type “Smart” and “Shel Silverstein” into Google and read the poem
now.* We will wait for you to get back before continuing.
WHEN DO WE NEED A NUDGE? 77
*Silverstein had personally given Thaler permission to use the poem in an academic
paper published in 1985—he said he was tickled to see his work appear in the American
Economic Review—but the poem is now controlled by his estate, which, after several
nudges (otherwise known as desperate pleas), has denied us permission to reprint the
poem here. Since we would have been happy to pay royalties, unlike the Web sites you
will find via Google, we can only guess that the managers of the estate (to paraphrase
the poem) don’t know that some is more than none.
For those of you reading this on a plane (or too lazy to get up out of
bed), the poem’s tale is simple. The child narrator explains that his father
gave him a dollar bill, which he wisely traded for two quarters because he
(unlike his dumb trading partners) knows that two is more than one. He
continues trading—the two quarters for three dimes; three dimes for four
nickels; and finally four nickels for five pennies. Finally the son comes back
to his father to report on his series of brilliant trades. When he does so, he
reports that his father was “too proud of [him] to speak.”
Suppose that some Humans in a well-functioning market economy prefer two quarters to one dollar because two is more than one. What happens
to these quarter lovers? Are they harmed? And do they influence market
prices? The answers to these questions depend a bit on how dumb the
quarter lovers are, but let’s suppose that while they prefer two quarters to
one dollar, they still prefer more quarters to fewer quarters (since they love
quarters). That means that while they would, in principle, be willing to
trade two quarters for a dollar, they won’t have to do that, because banks
(among others) will compete for their business, and will be happy to give
them four quarters for each dollar. Of course the quarter lovers will think
they are getting a great deal on this trade, but as long as there is competition in the provision of quarters, quarters will still sell for twenty-five cents
and the irrational love of quarters will be essentially harmless to those who
have this affliction.
The example is obviously an extreme one, but many markets are not so
different from this situation. Most of the time, competition ensures that
price serves as a good signal of quality. Usually (but not always) the fiftydollar bottles of wine are better than the twenty-dollar bottles. And irrational consumers will not alter the market as long as they do not predominate. So if some people choose wine by how much they like the label, they
will not be harmed, but if many people start to do that, then wine with attractive labels will be overpriced.
For irrational consumers to be protected there has to be competition.
Sometimes that competition does not exist. Consider the case of extended
warranties on small appliances, typically a bad deal for consumers. To take
a specific hypothetical example, suppose that a cell phone costs two hundred dollars. The cell phone has a free warranty for the first year, but the
cell phone company offers, for twenty dollars, an extended warranty for
78 HUMANS AND ECONS
the second year of the phone’s life. After that the consumer plans to buy a
new phone. Suppose that the chance that the phone will break during the
second year is 1 percent, so on average consumers will get two dollars’
worth of benefits from having this policy—but the price of the extended
warranty is twenty dollars in order to include a normal profit to the insurer
and a kickback (er, commission) to the salesperson at the cell phone store.
Of course, Econs understand all this and thus do not purchase extended
warranties. But Humans want extended warranties, perhaps because the
salesman offers the “friendly” advice that the extended warranty is a good
idea, or perhaps because they mistakenly think that cell phones break 15
percent of the time rather than 1 percent, or perhaps because they just
think that it’s “better to be safe than sorry.”
What happens? Do market forces drive these unduly expensive extended
warranties from the market? Or does competition drive the price of the extended warranties down to two dollars, the expected value of the claims?
The answers to these questions are no and no. (Before we explain, notice
that extended warranties are plentiful in the real world and that many people buy them. Hint: Don’t.)*
On our assumptions, the extended warranty is a product that simply
should not exist. If Humans realized that they were paying twenty dollars
for two dollars’ worth of insurance, they would not buy the insurance. But
if they do not realize this, markets cannot and will not unravel the situation. Competition will not drive the price down, in part because it takes
the salesperson a while to persuade someone to pay twenty dollars for two
dollars’ worth of insurance, and in part because it is difficult for third parties to enter this market efficiently. You might think that firms could educate people not to buy the warranty, and indeed they might. But why
should firms do that? If you are buying something that you shouldn’t, how
do I make any money persuading you not to buy it?
There is a general point here. If consumers have a less than fully rational
belief, firms often have more incentive to cater to that belief than to eradiWHEN DO WE NEED A NUDGE? 79
*Consider the Simpsons episode in which Homer has a crayon hammered into his
nose to lower his IQ. (Don’t ask.) The writers illustrate the lowering of Homer’s IQ by
having Homer make ever-stupider statements. The surgeon knows the operation is complete when Homer finally exclaims: “Extended warranty! How can I lose?” (Thanks to
Matthew Rabin for this tidbit.)
cate it. When many people were still afraid of flying, it was common to see
airline flight insurance sold at airports at exorbitant prices. There were no
booths in airports selling people advice not to buy such insurance.
In many markets, firms will be competing for the same consumers but
will be offering products that are not merely different but that directly oppose each other. Some firms sell cigarettes; others sell products that help
you quit smoking. Some firms sell fast food; others sell diet advice. If all
consumers are Econs, then there is no reason to worry about which of
these competing interests wins. But if some of the consumers are Humans
who sometimes make bad choices (as judged by themselves, of course),
then all of us may have an interest in which set of firms wins the battle.
Government can, of course, outlaw some kinds of activities, but as libertarian paternalists we prefer to nudge—and we are keenly aware that governments are populated by Humans.
What can be done to help? In the next chapter we describe our primary
tool: choice architecture.
80 HUMANS AND ECONS
81
Early in Thaler’s career, he was teaching a class on managerial decision making to business school students. Students would sometimes
leave class early to go for job interviews (or a golf game) and would try to
sneak out of the room as surreptitiously as possible. Unfortunately for
them, the only way out of the room was through a large double door in the
front, in full view of the entire class (though not directly in Thaler’s line of
sight). The doors were equipped with large, handsome wood handles, vertically mounted cylindrical pulls about two feet in length. When the students came to these doors, they were faced with two competing instincts.
One instinct says that to leave a room you push the door. The other instinct says, when faced with large wooden handles that are obviously designed to be grabbed, you pull. It turns out that the latter instinct trumps
the former, and every student leaving the room began by pulling on the
handle. Alas, the door opened outward.
At one point in the semester, Thaler pointed this out to the class, as one
embarrassed student was pulling on the door handle while trying to escape
the classroom. Thereafter, as a student got up to leave, the rest of the class
would eagerly wait to see whether the student would push or pull. Amazingly, most still pulled! Their Automatic Systems triumphed; the signal
emitted by that big wooden handle simply could not be screened out.
(And when Thaler would leave that room on other occasions, he sheepishly found himself pulling too.)
Those doors are bad architecture because they violate a simple psycho5
CHOICE ARCHITECTURE
logical principle with a fancy name: stimulus response compatibility. The
idea is that you want the signal you receive (the stimulus) to be consistent
with the desired action. When there are inconsistencies, performance suffers and people blunder.
Consider, for example, the effect of a large, red, octagonal sign that said
GO. The difficulties induced by such incompatibilities are easy to show experimentally. One of the most famous such demonstrations is the Stroop
(1935) test. In the modern version of this experiment people see words
flashed on a computer screen and they have a very simple task. They press
the right button if they see a word that is displayed in red, and press the left
button if they see a word diplayed in green. People find the task easy and
can learn to do it very quickly with great accuracy. That is, until they are
thrown a curve ball, in the form of the word green displayed in red, or the
word red displayed in green. For these incompatible signals, response
time slows and error rates increase. A key reason is that the Automatic System reads the word faster than the color naming system can decide the color
of the text. See the word green in red text and the nonthinking Automatic
System rushes to press the left button, which is, of course, the wrong one.
You can try this for yourself. Just get a bunch of colored crayons and write a
list of color names, making sure that most of the names are not the same as
the color they are written in. (Better yet, get a nearby kid to do this for
you.) Then name the color names as fast as you can (that is, read the words
and ignore the color): easy, isn’t it? Now say the color that the words are
written in as fast as you can and ignore the word itself: hard, isn’t it? In
tasks like this, Automatic Systems always win over Reflective ones.
Although we have never seen a green stop sign, doors such as the ones
described above are commonplace, and they violate the same principle.
Flat plates say “push me” and big handles say “pull me,” so don’t expect
people to push big handles! This is a failure of architecture to accommodate basic principles of human psychology. Life is full of products that suffer from such defects. Isn’t it obvious that the largest buttons on a television remote control should be the power, channel, and volume controls?
Yet how many remotes do we see that have the volume control the same
size as the “input” control button (which if pressed accidentally can cause
the picture to disappear)?
It is possible, however, to incorporate human factors into design, as
82 HUMANS AND ECONS
Don Norman’s wonderful book The Design of Everyday Things (1990) illustrates. One of his best examples is the design of a basic four-burner
stove (Figure 5.1). Most such stoves have the burners in a symmetric arrangement, as in the stove pictured at the top, with the controls arranged
in a linear fashion below. In this set-up, it is easy to get confused about
which knob controls the front burner and which controls the back, and
many pots and pans have been burned as a result. The other two designs
we have illustrated are only two of many better possibilities.
Norman’s basic lesson is that designers need to keep in mind that the
users of their objects are Humans who are confronted every day with myriad choices and cues. The goal of this chapter is to develop the same idea
for choice architects. If you indirectly influence the choices other people
make, you are a choice architect. And since the choices you are influencing
are going to be made by Humans, you will want your architecture to
reflect a good understanding of how humans behave. In particular, you
will want to ensure that the Automatic System doesn’t get all confused. In
this chapter, we offer some basic principles of good (and bad) choice architecture.
Defaults: Padding the Path of Least Resistance
For reasons we have discussed, many people will take whatever option requires the least effort, or the path of least resistance. Recall the discussion of inertia, status quo bias, and the “yeah, whatever” heuristic. All
these forces imply that if, for a given choice, there is a default option—an
option that will obtain if the chooser does nothing—then we can expect a
large number of people to end up with that option, whether or not it is
good for them. And as we have also stressed, these behavioral tendencies
toward doing nothing will be reinforced if the default option comes with
some implicit or explicit suggestion that it represents the normal or even
the recommended course of action.
Defaults are ubiquitous and powerful. They are also unavoidable in the
sense that for any node of a choice architecture system, there must be an
associated rule that determines what happens to the decision maker if she
does nothing. Of course, usually the answer is that if I do nothing, nothing
changes; whatever is happening continues to happen. But not always.
CHOICE ARCHITECTURE 83
5.1
Three designs of four-burner stovetops
Some dangerous machines, such as chain saws and lawn mowers, are designed with “dead man switches,” so that once you are no longer gripping
the machine, it stops. When you leave your computer alone for a while to
answer a phone call, nothing is likely to happen until you have talked for a
long time, at which point the screen saver comes on, and if you neglect the
computer long enough, it may lock itself.
Of course, you can choose how long it takes before your screen saver
comes on, but implementing that choice takes some action. Your computer probably came with a default time lag and a default screen saver.
Chances are, those are the settings you still have.
Many organizations in both the public and the private sector have discovered the immense power of default options. Successful businesses certainly have. Remember the idea of automatic renewal for magazine subscriptions? If renewal is automatic, many people will subscribe, for a long
time, to magazines they don’t read. Business offices at most magazines are
aware of that fact. When you download a new piece of software, you will
often have numerous choices to make. Do you want the “regular” or “custom” installation? Normally, one of the boxes is already checked, indicating it is the default. Which boxes do the software suppliers check? Two different motives are readily apparent: helpful and self-serving. In the helpful
category would be making the regular installation the default if most users
will have trouble with the custom installation. In the self-serving category
would be making the default a willingness to receive emails with information about new products. In our experience, most software comes with
helpful defaults regarding the type of installation, but many come with
self-serving defaults on other choices. We will have more to say about motives later. For now, note that not all defaults are selected to make the
chooser’s life easier or better.
The choice of the default can be quite controversial. Here is one example. An obscure portion of the No Child Left Behind Act requires that
school districts supply the names, addresses, and telephone numbers of
students to the recruiting offices of branches of the armed forces. However, the law stipulates that “a secondary school student or the parent of
the student may request that the student’s name, address, and telephone
listing not be released without prior written parental consent, and the local educational agency or private school shall notify parents of the option
CHOICE ARCHITECTURE 85
to make a request and shall comply with any request.” Some school districts, such as Fairport, New York, interpreted this law as allowing them to
implement an “opt-in” policy. That is, parents were notified that they
could elect to make their children’s contact information available, but if
they did not do anything, this information would be withheld.
This reading of the law did not meet with the approval of then–Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld. The Defense and Education Departments sent a letter to school districts asserting that the law required an optout implementation. Only if parents actively requested that the contact
information on their children be withheld would that option apply. In typical bureaucratic language, the departments contended that the relevant
laws “do not permit LEA’s [local educational agencies] to institute a policy of not providing the required information unless a parent has affirmatively agreed to provide the information.”1 Both the Defense Department
and the school districts realized that opt-in and opt-out policies would
lead to very different outcomes. Not surprisingly, much hue and cry ensued. We discuss a similarly touchy subject involving defaults in our chapter on organ donations.
We have emphasized that default rules are inevitable—that private institutions and the legal system cannot avoid choosing them. In some cases,
though not all, there is an important qualification to this claim. The choice
architect can force the choosers to make their own choice. We call this
approach “required choice” or “mandated choice.” In the software example, required choice would be implemented by leaving all the boxes unchecked, and by requiring that at every opportunity one of the boxes be
checked in order for people to proceed. In the case of the provision of contact information to the military recruiters, one could imagine a system in
which all students (or their parents) are required to fill out a form indicating whether they want to make their contact information available. For
emotionally charged issues like this one, such a policy has considerable appeal, because people might not want to be defaulted into an option that
they might hate (but fail to reject because of inertia, or real or apparent social pressure).
We believe that required choice, favored by many who like freedom, is
sometimes the best way to go. But consider two points about that approach. First, Humans will often consider required choice to be a nuisance
86 HUMANS AND ECONS
or worse, and would much prefer to have a good default. In the software
example, it is really helpful to know what the recommended settings are.
Most users do not want to have to read an incomprehensible manual in order to determine which arcane setting to elect. When choice is complicated and difficult, people might greatly appreciate a sensible default. It is
hardly clear that they should be forced to choose.
Second, required choosing is generally more appropriate for simple yesor-no decisions than for more complex choices. At a restaurant, the default
option is to take the dish as the chef usually prepares it, with the option to
ask that certain ingredients be added or removed. In the extreme, required
choosing would imply that the diner has to give the chef the recipe for
every dish she orders! When choices are highly complex, required choosing may not be a good idea; it might not even be feasible.
Expect Error
Humans make mistakes. A well-designed system expects its users
to err and is as forgiving as possible. Some examples from the world of real
design illustrate this point:
• In the Paris subway system, Le Métro, users insert a paper card the size
of a movie ticket into a machine that reads the card, leaves a record on the
card that renders it “used,” and then spits it out from the top of the machine. The cards have a magnetic strip on one side but are otherwise symmetric. On Thaler’s first visit to Paris, he was not sure how to use the system, so he tried putting the card in with the magnetic strip face up and was
pleased to discover that it worked. He was careful thereafter to insert the
card with the strip face up. Many years and trips to Paris later, he was
proudly demonstrating to a visiting friend the correct way to use the
Metro system when his wife started laughing. It turns out that it doesn’t
matter which way you put the card into the machine!
In stark contrast to Le Métro is the system used in most Chicago parking garages. When entering the garage, you put your credit card into a machine that reads it and remembers you. Then when leaving, you must insert the card again into another machine at the exit. This involves reaching
out of the car window and inserting the card into a slot. Because credit
cards are not symmetric, there are four possible ways to put the card into
CHOICE ARCHITECTURE 87
the slot (face up or down, strip on the right or left). Exactly one of those
ways is the right way. And in spite of a diagram above the slot, it is very easy
to put the card in the wrong way, and when the card is spit back out, it is
not immediately obvious what caused the card to be rejected or to recall
which way it was inserted the first time. Both of us have been stuck for several painful minutes behind some idiot who was having trouble with this
machine, and have to admit to having occasionally been the idiot that is
making all the people behind him start honking.
• Over the years, automobiles have become much friendlier to their Human operators. If you do not buckle your seat belt, you are buzzed. If you
are about to run out of gas, a warning sign appears and you might be
beeped. If you need an oil change, your car might tell you. Many cars come
with an automatic switch for the headlights that turns them on when you
are operating the car and off when you are not, eliminating the possibility
of leaving your lights on overnight and draining the battery.
But some error-forgiving innovations are surprisingly slow to be adopted.
Take the case of the gas tank cap. On any sensible car the gas cap is attached by a piece of plastic, so that when you remove the cap you cannot
possibly drive off without it. Our guess is that this bit of plastic cannot cost
more than ten cents. Once some firm had the good idea to include this
feature, what excuse can there ever have been for building a car without
one?
Leaving the gas cap behind is a special kind of predictable error psychologists call a “postcompletion” error.2 The idea is that when you have finished your main task, you tend to forget things relating to previous steps.
Other examples include leaving your atm card in the machine after getting your cash, or leaving the original in the copying machine after getting your copies. Most atms (but not all) no longer allow this error because you get your card back immediately. Another strategy, suggested by
Norman, is to use what he calls a “forcing function,” meaning that in order to get what you want, you have to do something else first. So if in order to get your cash, you have to remove the card, you will not forget to
do so.
• Another automobile-related bit of good design involves the nozzles
for different varieties of gasoline. The nozzles that deliver diesel fuel are
too large to fit into the opening on cars that use gasoline, so it is not possi88 HUMANS AND ECONS
ble to make the mistake of putting diesel fuel in your gasoline-powered car
(though it is still possible to make the opposite mistake). The same principle has been used to reduce the number of errors involving anesthesia.
One study found that human error (rather than equipment failure) caused
82 percent of the “critical incidents.” A common error was that the hose
for one drug was hooked up to the wrong delivery port, so the patient received the wrong drug. This problem was solved by designing the equipment so that the gas nozzles and connectors were different for each drug.
It became physically impossible to make this previously frequent mistake.3
• A major problem in health care is called “drug compliance.” Many patients, especially the elderly, are on medicines they must take regularly, and
in the correct dosage. So here is a choice-architecture question. If you are
designing a drug, and you have complete flexibility, how often would you
want your patients to have to take their medicine?
If we rule out a one-time dose administered immediately by the doctor
(which would be best on all dimensions but is often technically infeasible),
then the next-best solution is a medicine taken once a day, preferably in the
morning. It is clear why once a day is better than twice (or more) a day, because the more often you have to take the drug, the more opportunities
you have to forget. But frequency is not the only concern; regularity is also
important. Once a day is much better than once every other day, because
the Automatic System can be educated to think: “My pill(s) every morning, when I wake up.” Taking the pill becomes a habit, and habits are controlled by the Automatic System. By contrast, remembering to take your
medicine every other day is beyond most of us. (Similarly, meetings that
occur every week are easier to remember than those that occur every other
week.) Some medicines are taken once a week, and most patients take this
medicine on Sundays (because that day is different from other days for
most people and thus easy to associate with taking one’s medicine).
Birth control pills present a special problem along these lines, because
they are taken every day for three weeks and then skipped for one week. To
solve this problem and to make the process automatic, the pills are typically sold in a special container that contains twenty-eight pills, each in a
numbered compartment. Patients are instructed to take a pill every day, in
order. The pills for days twenty-two through twenty-eight are placebos
whose only role is to facilitate compliance for Human users.
CHOICE ARCHITECTURE 89
• While working on this book, Thaler sent an email to his economist
friend Hal Varian, who is affiliated with Google. Thaler intended to attach
a draft of the introduction to give Hal a sense of what the book was about,
but forgot the attachment. When Hal wrote back to ask for the missing attachment, he noted with pride that Google was experimenting with a new
feature on its email program “gmail” that would solve this problem. A user
who mentions the word attachment but does not include one would be
prompted, “Did you forget your attachment?” Thaler sent the attachment
along and told Hal that this was exactly what the book was about.
• Visitors to London who come from the United States or Europe have
a problem being safe pedestrians. They have spent their entire lives expecting cars to come at them from the left, and their Automatic System knows
to look that way. But in the United Kingdom automobiles drive on the
left-hand side of the road, and so the danger often comes from the right.
Many pedestrian accidents occur as a result. The city of London tries to
help with good design. On many corners, especially in neighborhoods frequented by tourists, the pavement has signs that say, “Look right!”
Give Feedback
The best way to help Humans improve their performance is to
provide feedback. Well-designed systems tell people when they are doing
well and when they are making mistakes. Some examples:
• Digital cameras generally provide better feedback to their users than
film cameras. After each shot, the photographer can see a (small) version of
the image just captured. This eliminates all kinds of errors that were common in the film era, from failing to load the film properly (or at all), to forgetting to remove the lens cap, to cutting off the head of the central figure
of the picture. However, early digital cameras failed on one crucial feedback dimension. When a picture was taken, there was no audible cue to indicate that the image had been captured. Modern models now include a
very satisfying but completely fake “shutter click” sound when a picture
has been taken. (Some cell phones, aimed at the elderly, include a fake dial
tone, for similar reasons.)
• An important type of feedback is a warning that things are going
wrong, or, even more helpful, are about to go wrong. Our laptops warn us
90 HUMANS AND ECONS
to plug in or shut down when the battery is dangerously low. But warning
systems have to avoid the problem of offering so many warnings that they
are ignored. If our computer constantly nags us about whether we are sure
we want to open that attachment, we begin to click “yes” without thinking about it. These warnings are thus rendered useless.
• The Department of Homeland Security’s color-coded terror alert system is a nice illustration of feedback that would be useless even if it weren’t
incessant. When walking through an American airport any time since
2002, one is bound to hear the following announcement: “The Department of Homeland Security has raised the National Threat Advisory to
Orange.” Aside from putting our toiletries into a one-quart zip-lock bag,
exactly what actions are we expected to take as a result of this warning?
A look at the Homeland Security Web site provides the answer. We are
told: “All Americans should continue to be vigilant, take notice of their
surroundings, and report suspicious items or activities to local authorities
immediately.” Weren’t we supposed to be doing this at level Yellow? It is a
safe bet that these announcements are useless. (Much more useful would
be a supply of one-quart zip-lock bags for absentminded travelers; and
many airports do in fact provide these.)
• Feedback can be improved in many activities. Consider the simple task
of painting a ceiling. This task is more difficult than it might seem because
ceilings are nearly always painted white, and it can be hard to see exactly
where you have painted. Later, when the paint dries, the patches of old
paint will be annoyingly visible. How to solve this problem? Some helpful
person invented a type of ceiling paint that goes on pink when wet but
turns white when dry. Unless the painter is so colorblind that he can’t tell
the difference between pink and white, this solves the problem.
Understanding “Mappings”: From Choice to Welfare
Some tasks are easy, like choosing a flavor of ice cream; other tasks
are hard, like choosing a medical treatment. Consider, for example, an ice
cream shop where the varieties differ only in flavor, not calories or other
nutritional content. Selecting which ice cream to eat is merely a matter of
choosing the one that tastes best. If the flavors are all familiar, such as
vanilla, chocolate, and strawberry, most people will be able to predict with
CHOICE ARCHITECTURE 91
considerable accuracy the relation between their choice and their ultimate
consumption experience. Call this relation between choice and welfare a
mapping. Even if there are some exotic flavors, the ice cream store can
solve the mapping problem by offering a free taste.
Choosing among treatments for some disease is quite another matter.
Suppose you are told that you have been diagnosed with prostate cancer
and must choose among three options: surgery, radiation, and “watchful
waiting” (which means do nothing for now). Each of these options comes
with a complex set of possible outcomes regarding side effects of treatment, quality of life, length of life, and so forth. Comparing the options involves making such trade-offs as the following: Would I be willing to risk a
one-third chance of impotence or incontinence in order to increase my life
expectancy by 3.2 years? This is a hard decision at two levels. First, the patient is unlikely to know these trade-offs, and second, he is unlikely to be
able to imagine what life would be like if he were incontinent. Yet here are
two scary facts about this scenario. First, most patients decide which
course of action to take in the very meeting at which their doctor breaks
the bad news about the diagnosis. Second, the treatment option they
choose depends strongly on the type of doctor they see.4 (Some specialize
in surgery, others in radiation. None specialize in watchful waiting. Guess
which option we suspect might be underutilized?)
The comparison between ice cream and treatment options illustrates the
concept of mapping. A good system of choice architecture helps people to
improve their ability to map and hence to select options that will make
them better off. One way to do this is to make the information about various options more comprehensible, by transforming numerical information into units that translate more readily into actual use. If I am buying
apples to make into apple cider, it helps to know the rule of thumb that it
takes three apples to make one glass of cider.
Take the example of choosing a digital camera. Cameras advertise their
megapixels, and the impression created is certainly that the more megapixels the better. This assumption is itself subject to question, because photos
taken with more megapixels take up more room on the camera’s storage
device and a computer’s hard drive. But what is really problematic for consumers is translating megapixels (not the most intuitive concept) into what
they care about. Is it worth paying an additional hundred dollars to go
92 HUMANS AND ECONS
from four to five megapixels? Suppose instead that manufacturers listed
the largest print size recommended for a given camera. Instead of being
given the options of three, five, or seven megapixels, consumers might be
told that the camera can produce quality photos at 4 × 6 inches, 9 × 12, or
“poster size.”
Often people have a problem in mapping products into money. For simple choices, of course, such mappings are trivial. If a Snickers bar costs one
dollar, you can easily figure out how much it costs to have a Snickers bar
every day. But do you know how much it costs you to use your credit card?
Among the fees you may be paying are: (a) an annual fee for the privilege
of using the card (common for cards that provide benefits such as frequent
flyer miles); (b) an interest rate for borrowing money (that depends on
your deemed credit worthiness); (c) a fee for making a payment late (and
you may end up making more late payments than you anticipate); (d) interest on purchases made during the month that is normally not charged if
your balance is paid off but begins if you make your payment one day late;
and (e) a charge for buying things in currencies other than dollars.
Credit cards are not alone in having complex pricing schemes that are
neither transparent nor comprehensible to consumers. Think about mortgages, cell phone calling plans, and auto insurance policies, just to name a
few. For these and related domains, we propose a very mild form of government regulation, a species of libertarian paternalism that we call recap:
Record, Evaluate, and Compare Alternative Prices.
Here is how recap would work in the cell phone market. The government would not regulate how much issuers could charge for services, but it
would regulate their disclosure practices. The central goal would be to inform customers of every kind of fee that currently exists. This would not
be done by printing a long unintelligible document in fine print. Instead,
issuers would be required to make public their fee schedule in a spreadsheetlike format that would include all relevant formulas. Suppose you are
in Toronto and your cell phone rings. How much is it going to cost you to
answer it? What if you download some email? All these prices would be
embedded in the formulas. This is the price disclosure part of the regulation.
The usage disclosure requirement would be that once a year, issuers
would have to send their customers a complete listing of all the ways they
CHOICE ARCHITECTURE 93
had used the phone and all the fees that had been incurred. This report
would be sent two ways, by mail and, more important, electronically. The
electronic version would also be stored and downloadable on a secure Web
site.
Producing the recap reports would cost cell phone carriers very little,
but the reports would be extremely useful for customers who want to
compare the pricing plans of cell phone providers, especially after they had
received their first annual statement. Private Web sites similar to existing
travel sites would emerge to allow an easy way to compare services. With
just a few quick clicks, a shopper would easily be able to import her usage
data from the past year and find out how much various carriers would have
charged, given her usage patterns.* Consumers who are new to the product (getting a cell phone for the first time, for example) would have to
guess usage information for various categories, but the following year they
could take full advantage of the system’s capabilities. We will see that
in many domains, from mortgages and credit cards to energy use to Medicare, a recap program could greatly improve people’s ability to make
good choices.
Structure Complex Choices
People adopt different strategies for making choices depending on
the size and complexity of the available options. When we face a small
number of well-understood alternatives, we tend to examine all the attributes of all the alternatives and then make trade-offs when necessary. But
when the choice set gets large, we must use alternative strategies, and these
can get us into trouble.
Consider, for example, Jane, who has just been offered a job at a company located in large city far from where she is living now. Compare two
choices she faces: which office to select and which apartment to rent. Suppose Jane is offered a choice of three available offices in her workplace. A
94 HUMANS AND ECONS
*We are aware, of course, that behavior depends on prices. If my current cell phone
provider charges me a lot to make calls in Canada and I react by not making such calls,
I will not be able to judge the full value of an alternative plan with cheap calling in
Canada. But where past usage is a good predictor of future usage, a recap plan would
be very helpful.
reasonable strategy for her to follow would be to look at all three offices,
note the ways they differ, and then make some decisions about the importance of such attributes as size, view, neighbors, and distance to the
nearest rest room. This is described in the choice literature as a “compensatory” strategy, since a high value for one attribute (big office) can compensate for a low value for another (loud neighbor).
Obviously, the same strategy cannot be used to pick an apartment. In a
large city like Los Angeles, thousands of apartments are available. If Jane
ever wants to start working, she will not be able to visit each apartment and
evaluate them all. Instead, she is likely to simplify the task in some way.
One strategy to use is what Amos Tversky (1972) called “elimination by
aspects.” Someone using this strategy first decides what aspect is most important (say, commuting distance), establishes a cutoff level (say, no more
than a thirty-minute commute), then eliminates all the alternatives that do
not come up to this standard. The process is repeated, attribute by attribute (no more than $1,500 per month; at least two bedrooms; dogs permitted), until either a choice is made or the set is narrowed down enough
to switch over to a compensatory evaluation of the “finalists.”
When people are using a simplifying strategy of this kind, alternatives
that do not meet the minimum cutoff scores may be eliminated even if
they are fabulous on all other dimensions. So, for example, an apartment
that is a thirty-five-minute commute will not be considered even if it has a
dynamite view and costs two hundred dollars a month less than any of the
alternatives.
Social science research reveals that as the choices become more numerous and/or vary on more dimensions, people are more likely to adopt
simplifying strategies. The implications for choice architecture are related.
As alternatives become more numerous and more complex, choice architects have more to think about and more work to do, and are much more
likely to influence choices (for better or for worse). For an ice cream shop
with three flavors, any menu listing those flavors in any order will do just
fine, and effects on choices (such as order effects) are likely to be minor because people know what they like. As choices become more numerous,
though, good choice architecture will provide structure, and structure will
affect outcomes.
Consider the example of a paint store. Even ignoring the possibility of
CHOICE ARCHITECTURE 95
special orders, paint companies sell more than two thousand colors that
you can apply to the walls in your home. It is possible to think of many
ways of structuring how those paint colors are offered to the customer.
Imagine, for example, that the paint colors were listed alphabetically. Artic
White might be followed by Azure Blue, and so forth. While alphabetical
order is a satisfactory way to organize a dictionary (at least if you have a
guess as to how a word is spelled), it is a lousy way to organize a paint store.
Instead, paint stores have long used something like a paint wheel, with
color samples ordered by similarity: all the blues are together, next to the
greens, and the reds are located near the oranges, and so forth. The problem of selection is made considerably easier by the fact that people can see
the actual colors, especially since the names of the paints are spectacularly
uninformative. (On the Benjamin Moore Paints Web site, three similar
shades of beige are called “Roasted Sesame Seed,” “Oklahoma Wheat,”
and “Kansas Grain.”)
Thanks to modern computer technology and the World Wide Web,
many problems of consumer choice have been made simpler. The Benjamin Moore Paints Web site not only allows the consumer to browse
through dozens of shades of beige, but it also permits the consumer to see
(within the limitations of the computer monitor) how a particular shade
will work on the walls with the ceiling painted in a complementary color.
And the variety of paint colors is small compared to the number of books
sold by Amazon (millions) or Web pages covered by Google (billions).
Many companies such as Netflix, the mail-order dvd rental company, succeed in part because of immensely helpful choice architecture. Customers
looking for a movie to rent can easily search movies by actor, director,
genre, and more, and if they rate the movies they have watched, they can
also get recommendations based on the preferences of other movie lovers
with similar tastes, a method called “collaborative filtering.” You use the
judgments of other people who share your tastes to filter through the vast
number of books or movies available in order to increase the likelihood of
picking one you like. Collaborative filtering is an effort to solve a problem
of choice architecture. If you know what people like you tend to like, you
might well be comfortable in selecting products you don’t know, because
people like you tend to like them. For many of us, collaborative filtering is
making difficult choices easier.
96 HUMANS AND ECONS
A cautionary note: surprise and serendipity can be fun for people, and
good for them too, and it may not be entirely wonderful if our primary
source of information is about what people like us like. Sometimes it’s
good to learn what people unlike us like—and to see whether we might
even like that. If you like the mystery writer Robert B. Parker (and we
agree that he’s great), collaborative filtering will probably direct you to
other mystery writers (we suggest trying Lee Child, by the way), but why
not try a little Joyce Carol Oates, or maybe even Henry James? If you’re a
Democrat, and you like books that fit your predilections, you might want
to see what Republicans think; no party can possibly have a monopoly on
wisdom. Public-spirited choice architects—those who run the daily newspaper, for example—know that it’s good to nudge people in directions
that they might not have specifically chosen in advance. Structuring choice
sometimes means helping people to learn, so they can later make better
choices on their own.5
Incentives
Our last topic is the one with which most economists would have
started: prices and incentives. Though we have been stressing factors that
are often neglected by traditional economic theory, we do not intend to
suggest that standard economic forces are unimportant. This is as good a
point as any to state for the record that we believe in supply and demand.
If the price of a product goes up, suppliers will usually produce more of it
and consumers will usually want less of it. So choice architects must think
about incentives when they design a system. Sensible architects will put the
right incentives on the right people. One way to start to think about incentives is to ask four questions about a particular choice architecture:
Who uses?
Who chooses?
Who pays?
Who profits?
Free markets often solve all of the key problems by giving people an incentive to make good products and to sell them at the right price. If the
market for sneakers is working well, there will be a lot of competition; bad
CHOICE ARCHITECTURE 97
sneakers will be driven from the market and the good ones will be priced in
accordance with people’s tastes. Sneaker producers and sneaker purchasers
have the right incentives. But sometimes incentive conflicts arise. Consider
a simple case. When we go for our weekly lunch, each of us chooses his
own meal and pays for what he eats. The restaurant serves us our food and
keeps our money. No conflicts here. Now suppose we decide to take turns
paying for lunch. Sunstein now has an incentive to order something more
expensive on the weeks that Thaler is paying, and vice versa. (In this case,
though, friendship introduces a complication; one of us may well order
something cheaper if he knows that the other is paying. Sentimental but
true.)
Many markets (and choice architecture systems) are replete with incentive conflicts. Perhaps the most notorious is the U.S. health care system.
The patient receives the health care services that are chosen by his physician and paid for by the insurance company, with everyone from equipment manufacturers to drug companies to malpractice lawyers taking a
piece of the action. Those with different pieces have different incentives,
and the results may not be ideal for either patients or doctors. Of course,
this point is obvious to anyone who thinks about these problems. But as
usual, it is possible to elaborate and enrich the standard analysis by remembering that the agents in the economy are Humans. To be sure, even
mindless Humans demand less when they notice that the price has gone
up. But will they notice? Only if they are really paying attention.
The most important modification that must be made to a standard
analysis of incentives is salience. Do the choosers actually notice the incentives they face? In free markets, the answer is usually yes, but in important
cases the answer is no. Consider the example of members of an urban family deciding whether to buy a car. Suppose their choices are to take taxis
and public transportation or to spend ten thousand dollars to buy a used
car, which they can park on the street in front of their home. The only
salient costs of owning this car will be the weekly stops at the gas station,
occasional repair bills, and a yearly insurance bill. The opportunity cost of
the ten thousand dollars is likely to be neglected. (In other words, once
they purchase the car, they tend to forget about the ten thousand dollars
and stop treating it as money that could have been spent on something
else.) In contrast, every time the family uses a taxi the cost will be in their
98 HUMANS AND ECONS
face, with the meter clicking every few blocks. So a behavioral analysis of
the incentives of car ownership will predict that people will underweight
the opportunity costs of car ownership, and possibly other less salient aspects such as depreciation, and may overweight the very salient costs of using a taxi.* An analysis of choice architecture systems must make similar
adjustments.
Of course, salience can be manipulated, and good choice architects can
take steps to direct people’s attention to incentives. The telephones at the
insead School of Business in France are programmed to display the running costs of long-distance phone calls. If we want to protect the environment and to increase energy independence, similar strategies could be
used to make costs more salient. Suppose the thermostat in your home was
programmed to tell you the cost per hour of lowering the temperature a
few degrees during the heat wave. This would probably have more effect
on your behavior than quietly raising the price of electricity, a change that
will be experienced only at the end of the month when the bill comes. Suppose in this light that government wants to increase energy conservation.
Increases in the price of electricity will surely have an effect; making the increases salient will have a greater effect. Cost-disclosing thermostats might
have a greater impact than (modest) price increases designed to decrease
use of electricity.
In some domains, people may want the salience of gains and losses
treated asymmetrically. For example, no one would want to go to a health
club that charged its users on a “per step” basis on the Stairmaster. However, many Stairmaster users enjoy watching the “calories burned” meter
while they work out (especially since those meters seem to give generous
estimates of calories actually burned). Even better, for some, might be a
pictorial display that indicated the calories one had burned in terms of
food: after ten minutes one had earned only a bag of carrots but after forty
minutes a large cookie.
We have sketched six principles of good choice architecture. As a concession to the bounded memory of our readers, we thought it might be
CHOICE ARCHITECTURE 99
*Companies such as Zipcar that specialize in short-term rentals could profitably
benefit by helping people solve these mental accounting problems.
useful to offer a mnemonic device to help recall the six principles. By rearranging the order, and using one small fudge, the following emerges.
iNcentives
Understand mappings
Defaults
Give feedback
Expect error
Structure complex choices
Voilà: NUDGES
With an eye on these nudges, choice architects can improve the outcomes for their Human users.
100 HUMANS AND ECONS
PART
II
MONEY
Not surprisingly, Humans differ dramatically from Econs in how
they deal with money. Econs are sensible spenders and savers. They put
money away for a rainy day, and for retirement, and they invest that money
as if they had mbas. When they borrow, Econs have no trouble choosing
between fixed- and variable-rate mortgages, and they pay their credit card
bills on time every month. If you are an Econ, you can skip this section of
the book, unless you want to understand the behavior of your spouse, kids,
and other Humans. A major goal of the next four chapters is to explore
how people can do a better job at the difficult tasks of saving, investing,
and borrowing. We also offer some suggestions about how private and
public institutions might nudge people in directions that will make them a
bit wealthier and more secure.
This page intentionally left blank
6
SAVE MORE TOMORROW
103
In 2005 the personal savings rate for Americans was negative for
the first time since 1932 and 1933—the Great Depression years. On average, American households spent more than they earned and borrowed
more than they saved. Increased borrowing rates were fueled by substantial growth in home equity loans and in credit card debt. For many Americans, savings rates, especially retirement savings, are woefully low, if not
zero. Consider, for example, the case of Tony Snow, the former White
House press secretary, who resigned at age fifty-two in 2007 to return to
the private sector. He said his motivation for leaving was financial. “I ran
out of money,” he told reporters. “We took out a loan when I came to the
White House, and that loan is now gone. So I’m going to have to pay the
bills.” Before serving as press secretary, Snow worked a much more lucrative gig as a Fox News Channel anchor. But he arrived at the White House
not having learned Retirement 101 lessons. “Snow conceded: ‘As a matter
of fact, I was even too dopey to get in on a 401(k).’”1
The fact that many people are not saving for retirement exacerbates the
looming problems facing the Social Security system. As all politicians
know but few are willing to say, we will eventually have to bite the bullet in
order to make Social Security solvent, through some combination of tax
increases or benefit cuts. Americans would be better able to deal with this
problem if they were saving more on their own. And indeed, the government has often passed laws designed to encourage personal savings, typically by creating tax-favored savings accounts such as iras and 401(k)s.
Such programs are well intended, but many Americans who are eligible for
such plans do not take full advantage of them.
What can be done to help? We will be offering two central suggestions.
The first is automatic enrollment in savings plans; the second is the Save
More Tomorrow program. To understand why these nudges would work,
and why they are not part of the usual economics repertoire, we need to
step back a bit.
The standard economic theory of saving for retirement is both elegant
and simple. People are assumed to calculate how much they are going to
earn over the rest of their lifetime, figure out how much they will need
when they retire, and then save up just enough to enjoy a comfortable retirement without sacrificing too much while they are still working.
As a guideline for how to think sensibly about saving, this theory is excellent, but as an approach to how people actually behave, the theory runs
into two serious problems. First, it assumes that people are capable of solving a complicated mathematical problem in order to figure out how much
to save. Without good computer software, even a trained economist
would find this problem daunting. The truth is that we know few economists (and no lawyers) who have made a serious attempt at doing it (even
with software).*
The second problem with the theory is that it assumes that people have
enough willpower to implement the relevant plan. Under the standard
theory, flashy sports cars or nice vacations never distract people from their
project of saving up for a condo in Florida. In short, the standard theory is
about Econs, not Humans.
For most of their time on earth, Humans did not have to worry much
about saving for retirement, because most people did not live long enough
to have much of a retirement period. In most societies, those who did
make it to old age were cared for by their children. In the twentieth century, the combination of rising life expectancies and geographical dispersion of families made it necessary for people to think about providing for
their own retirement income rather than depending on their children to
104 MONEY
*There are good software products available from many mutual fund companies as
well as from such independent firms as Financial Engines and Morningstar, but many
Humans find using these programs both difficult and boring.
do it. Both employers and governments began to take steps to help with
this problem, with Bismarck’s early social security program in Germany
leading the way in 1889.2
Early pension plans tended to be defined-benefit plans. In such plans,
participants are entitled to a benefit that depends on a specific formula,
typically based on the participant’s salary and the number of years the participant was a member of the plan. In a typical private plan, a worker is entitled to receive a benefit that is a proportion of the salary paid over the last
few years of work, the proportion depending on years of service.
Most public social security systems, including that of the United States,
are also defined-benefit plans. Your Social Security check depends on the
amount you have paid in taxes and the number of years you have worked.
The payouts are even adjusted for inflation, so you know exactly what you
will be paid (unless Congress changes its mind, as it is entitled to do; the
Constitution does not protect your right to Social Security benefits).
From the perspective of choice architecture, defined-benefit plans have
one large virtue: they are forgiving to even the most mindless of Humans.
With Social Security, the only decision a worker has to make is when to
start receiving benefits. The only form to fill out is the one where you write
down your Social Security number, and you have to fill it out if you want
to get paid! In the private sector, defined-benefit plans are also easy and
forgiving, as long as the worker keeps working for the same employer, and
the employer stays in business. The decision about when to retire is not so
easy, but it is only one decision; the same is true for the decision about
when to start claiming Social Security benefits. We discuss that decision,
and how the government might offer some useful nudges, at the end of
this chapter.
While a defined-benefit world can be an easy one for someone who stays
in one job her entire life, employees who change jobs frequently can end
up with virtually no retirement benefits, because there is often a minimum
employment period (such as five years) before any benefits are vested (that
is, owned by the employee). Defined-benefit plans are also expensive for
employers to administer. Many old firms are switching over to definedcontribution plans, and nearly all new firms offer only defined-contribution plans. Under a defined-contribution plan, employees, and sometimes
employers, make specific contributions to a tax-sheltered account in the
SAVE MORE TOMORROW 105
employee’s name. The benefits received by employees in retirement depend on the decisions they make about how much to save and how to invest.
Defined-contribution plans, such as 401(k) plans in the United States,
have many desirable features for modern workers. The plans are completely portable, so a worker is free to move from one job to another. The
plans are also flexible, giving employees the opportunity to adjust their
savings and investment decisions to reflect their own financial situation
and tastes. However, defined-contribution plans are not very forgiving.
Employees have to get around to joining, to figuring out how much to
save, to managing their portfolio over a period of years, and then to deciding what to do with the proceeds when they finally retire. People can find
the whole process frightening, and many seem to be making a mess of the
task.
Are People Saving Enough?
Of course, a key question is whether people are saving enough.
Are they? This turns out to be a complex and controversial question. For
one thing, economists do not agree about how much saving is appropriate,
because they do not agree on the right level of post-retirement income.
Some economists argue that people should aim to have retirement income
that is at least as high as the income enjoyed when working, because retirement years offer the opportunity for such time-intensive expensive activities as travel. Retired people also have to worry about growing health
care costs. Others claim that retirees can use their greater time to live a
more economical lifestyle: saving the money once spent on business
clothes, taking the time to shop carefully and prepare meals at home, and
taking advantage of senior discounts.
We do not take a strong position on this debate, but consider a few
points. It seems clear that the costs of saving too little are greater than the
costs of saving too much. There are many ways to cope with having saved
too much—from retiring earlier than expected, to taking up golf, to traveling to Europe, to spoiling the grandchildren. Coping in the opposite direction is less pleasant. Second, we can say for sure that some people in our
society are definitely saving too little—namely, those employees who are
106 MONEY
not participating at all in their retirement plan, or are saving a low percentage of their income after having reached their forties (or older). These
folks could clearly use a nudge.
For what it is worth, many employees say that they “should” be saving
more. In one study, 68 percent of 401(k) participants said that their savings rate is “too low,” 31 percent said that their savings rate is “about
right,” and only 1 percent said their savings rate is “too high.” Economists
tend to belittle such statements, and partly for good reason. It is easy to
say that you “should” be doing many good things—dieting, exercising,
spending more time with your children—and people’s actions may tell us
more than their words. After all, few of the participants who say they
should be saving more make any changes in their behavior. But such statements are not meaningless or random. Many people announce an intention to eat less and exercise more next year, but few say they hope to smoke
more next year or watch more sitcom reruns. We interpret the statement
“I should be saving (or dieting, or exercising) more” to imply that people
would be open to strategies that would help them achieve these goals. In
other words, they are open to a nudge. They might even be grateful for
one.
Enrollment Decisions: Nudging People to Join
The first step in participating in a defined contribution plan, such
as a 401(k), is to enroll. Most workers should find joining the plan very attractive. Contributions are tax deductible, accumulations are tax deferred,
and in many plans the employer matches at least part of the contributions
of the employee. For example, a common plan feature is that the employer
will match 50 percent of the employee’s contributions up to some threshold, such as 6 percent of salary.
This match is virtually free money. Taking full advantage of the match
should be a no-brainer for all but the most impatient or cash-strapped
households. Nevertheless, enrollment rates in such plans are far from 100
percent. Roughly 30 percent of employees eligible to join a 401(k) plan fail
to enroll.3 Typically, younger, less-educated, and lower-income employees
are less likely to join, but even high-paid workers sometimes fail to sign up,
as the Tony Snow example illustrates.
SAVE MORE TOMORROW 107
To be sure, there are situations, say for young workers with other pressing financial needs, in which it could be sensible not to join even with an
employer match. But in many cases, the failure to join is simply a blunder.
One extreme example comes from the United Kingdom, where some
defined-benefit plans do not require any employee contributions and are
fully paid for by the employer. They do require employees to take action to
join the plan. Data on twenty-five such plans reveal that scarcely half of the
eligible employees (51 percent) signed up!4 This is equivalent to not bothering to cash your paycheck.
Some older American workers are also turning down “free money.” To
have this free money option, a worker must meet three qualifications: he
needs to be more than 591/2 years old, so that he faces no tax penalty when
he withdraws funds from his retirement account; his firm has to offer a
matching contribution (meaning that the firm contributes something if
the employee does); and his employer has to allow employees to withdraw
funds from their retirement accounts while still working. For such employees, joining the plan is a sure profit opportunity because they can join,
then immediately withdraw their contributions without any penalty, yet
keep the employer match. Nonetheless, a study finds that up to 40 percent
of eligible workers either do not join the plan at all or do not save enough
to get the full match.5
These extreme examples are just the clearest cases in which people’s failure to join a plan is foolish beyond a doubt. In many other cases, workers
take months or years to join the plan, and it is a reasonable assumption that
most of these workers are just spacing out or procrastinating rather than
making a reasoned decision that they have a better use for their money.
How can we nudge these people to join more quickly?*
Making Savings Automatic
An obvious answer is to change the default rule. As things now
stand, the default is nonenrollment; you have to do a little work to get into
108 MONEY
*By the way, are you contributing the maximum to your retirement plan, or at least
contributing enough to get the full match from your employer? Are your grown children doing so? If not, stop reading and get busy. You have more important things to do
than read this book.
a retirement plan. When workers are first eligible to join (sometimes immediately upon employment), they usually receive a form to fill out. Employees who want to join must decide how much to put aside, and how to
allocate their investments among the funds offered in the plan. Forms can
be a headache, and many employees just put them aside.
An alternative is to adopt automatic enrollment. Here’s how it works.
When an employee first becomes eligible, she receives a form indicating
that she will be enrolled in the plan (at a specified savings rate and asset allocation), unless she actively fills out a form asking to opt out. Automatic
enrollment has proven to be an extremely effective way to increase enrollment in U.S. defined-contribution plans.6
In one plan studied in an early paper by Brigitte Madrian and Dennis
Shea (2001), participation rates under the opt-in approach were barely 20
percent after three months of employment, gradually increasing to 65 percent after thirty-six months. But when automatic enrollment was adopted,
enrollment of new employees jumped to 90 percent immediately and increased to more than 98 percent within thirty-six months. Automatic enrollment thus has two effects: participants join sooner, and more participants join eventually.
Does automatic enrollment merely overcome workers’ inertia, helping
them make the choice they would actually prefer? Or does automatic enrollment somehow seduce workers into saving when they would prefer to
be spending? One telling bit of evidence is that under automatic enrollment, very few employees drop out of the plan once enrolled. In a study of
four companies that adopted automatic enrollment, the fraction of 401(k)
participants who dropped out of the plan in the first year was only 0.3 to
0.6 percentage points higher than it had been before automatic enrollment was introduced.7 Although the low dropout rate is, of course, partly
due to inertia, the fact that so few people drop out does suggest that workers are not suddenly discovering, to their dismay, that they are saving more
than they had wanted.
Forced Choosing and More Simplicity
An alternative to automatic enrollment is simply to require every
employee to make an active decision about whether to join the plan. If a
SAVE MORE TOMORROW 109
worker is eligible when he is first hired, he might be required to check a
“yes” or a “no” box for participation in order to get paid. With required
choosing in place, employees have to state their preferences, and there is
no default option. As compared with the usual opt-in approach (you are
not enrolled unless you decide to fill out the forms), required choosing
should increase participation rates. One company switched from an opt-in
regime to active decisions and found that participation rates increased by
about 25 percentage points.8
A related strategy is to simplify the enrollment process. One study tested
this idea by analyzing a simplified enrollment form.9 New employees were
handed enrollment cards during orientation with a “yes” box for joining
the plan at a 2 percent savings rate and a preselected asset allocation. Employees did not have to spend time choosing a savings rate and asset allocation; they could just check the “yes” box for participation. As a result,
participation rates during the first four months of employment jumped
from 9 percent to 34 percent. These simplified enrollment procedures are
very much in the spirit of the “channel factors” we mentioned in Chapter
3. People really do want to join the plan, and if you dig a channel for them
to slide down that removes the seemingly tiny barriers that are getting in
their way, the results can be quite dramatic.
While automatic enrollment or “quick” enrollment makes the process
of joining a retirement plan less daunting, expanding the number of funds
available to participants can have the opposite effect. One study finds that
the more options in the plan, the lower the participation rates.10 This finding should not be surprising. With more options, the process becomes
more confusing and difficult, and some people will refuse to choose at all.
Choosing Contribution Rates
Both automatic enrollment programs and forced choosing plans
typically adopt a relatively low default savings rate of 2 or 3 percent, and a
very conservative investment choice, such as a money market account. It
turns out that many employees continue saving at the default rate of 2 percent. This rate is usually far too low to provide enough money for retirement. Many employees also remain in the default investment fund, and
they lose a lot of money as a result. We will turn to investment strategies in
110 MONEY
the next chapter. Here let’s see how we can help nudge the people who are
saving too little.
One indication that people need help in picking a savings rate and don’t
realize that they need the help is that most people spend very little time on
this important financial decision. One survey found that 58 percent spent
less than one hour determining both their contribution rate and investment decisions.11 Most people spend more time than that picking a new
tennis racket or television set. Apparently, many people are using some
simple shortcuts. In many plans, participants are asked to state a desired
savings rate as a percentage of pay. Many people simply pick a “round number,” typically 5, 10, or 15 percent of income. Of course, there is no sensible reason why the correct percentage of your income to save would be an
exact multiple of 5.
Another common rule of thumb is to contribute to a retirement account
the minimum amount necessary to get the full employer match. If the employer matches employees’ contributions up to 6 percent of pay, then
many employees contribute 6 percent. If participants are behaving this
way, then firms wanting to encourage employee savings might alter their
matching formula to help workers. Changing the match formula from 50
percent on the first 6 percent of pay to 30 percent on the first 10 percent of
pay would probably increase contribution rates. Those who use the match
threshold as a rule of thumb would save more with a higher matching
threshold. And by picking a round number as the threshold, the company
would nudge those who use the “multiple of 5” heuristic.
Education
What else can employers do, if they want more employees to enroll in retirement plans, contribute an amount that will build a reasonable
retirement nest egg, and allocate the funds among assets in an appropriately diversified way? Education is the obvious answer, and many employers have tried to educate their employees to make better decisions. Unfortunately, the evidence does not suggest that education is, in and of itself,
an adequate solution.
One large employer, having offered its employees the chance to switch
from a defined-benefit to a defined-contribution plan, provided a free
SAVE MORE TOMORROW 111
financial education program.12 The employer measured the effectiveness
of this education by administering a before-and-after test of financial literacy. The quiz used a true/false format, so random answers would receive,
on average, a score of 50 percent. Before the education, the average score
of the employees was 54; after the education, the average score crept up to
55. Teaching is hard!
Employees often leave educational seminars excited about saving more
but then fail to follow through on their plans. One study found that at the
seminar everyone expressed an interest in saving more, but only 14 percent
actually joined the savings plan. This was an improvement, but not a large
one, over the 7 percent of comparable employees who did not attend a
seminar and joined the savings plan.13 Studies of the effects of attendance
at a “benefit fair” also find only a small effect on participation in a taxdeferred savings account.14
Save More Tomorrow
Although automatic enrollment is effective at getting new and
young workers to enroll sooner than they would have otherwise, participants tend to stick with the default contribution rate, which is typically
quite low. To mitigate this problem, consider a program of automatic escalation of contributions, developed by Thaler and his frequent collaborator Shlomo Benartzi, called Save More Tomorrow.
Save More Tomorrow is a choice-architecture system that was constructed with close reference to five psychological principles that underlie
human behavior:
• Many participants say that they think they should be saving more, and
plan to save more, but never follow through.
• Self-control restrictions are easier to adopt if they take place some
time in the future. (Many of us are planning to start diets soon, but
not today.)
• Loss aversion: people hate to see their paychecks go down.
• Money illusion: losses are felt in nominal dollars (that is, not adjusted
for inflation, so a dollar in 1995 is seen as worth the same as a dollar in
2005).
• Inertia plays a powerful role.
112 MONEY
Save More Tomorrow invites participants to commit themselves, in advance, to a series of contribution increases timed to coincide with pay
raises. By synchronizing pay raises and savings increases, participants never
see their take-home amounts go down, and they don’t view their increased
retirement contributions as losses. Once someone joins the program, the
saving increases are automatic, using inertia to increase savings rather than
prevent savings. When combined with automatic enrollment, this design
can achieve both high participation rates and increased savings rates.
The first implementation of Save More Tomorrow occurred in 1998, at
a midsized manufacturing firm. Employees were given the opportunity to
meet one-on-one with a financial consultant. The consultant had a laptop
with software designed to compute suggested savings rates based on relevant information provided by each employee (such as past savings and the
retirement plan of a spouse). About 90 percent of the employees accepted
the offer to meet with the financial consultant. Many were a bit surprised
by what they heard. Because most employees were saving at very low rates,
the adviser told almost every employee that he needed to save a lot more.
Often the software suggested a savings rate equal to the maximum allowed
in the plan, 15 percent of pay. But the consultant quickly realized that such
suggestions were immediately rejected as infeasible, so he generally suggested increasing the savings rate by 5 percentage points of pay.
About 25 percent of the participants accepted this advice and immediately increased their savings rates by the recommended 5 percentage
points. The rest said that they could not afford the cut in pay; these reluctant savers were offered the Save More Tomorrow program. Specifically,
they were offered a plan in which their savings rates would go up by 3 percentage points every time they got a pay raise. (A typical pay raise was
about 3.25 to 3.50 percent.) Of this group of employees who were unwilling to increase their savings rate immediately, 78 percent joined the program to increase their contribution with every pay raise.
The results provide a dramatic illustration of the potential power of
choice architecture. Compare the behavior of three groups of employees.
The first group consists of those who chose not to meet with the consultant. This group was saving about 6 percent of their income when the program started, and that percentage did not budge over the next three years.
The second group contains the employees who accepted the advice to inSAVE MORE TOMORROW 113
crease their savings rates by 5 percentage points. Their average savings rate
jumped from just over 4 percent to just over 9 percent after the first raise
occurred. This rate was then essentially constant over the next few years.
The third group includes those who joined the Save More Tomorrow
plan. That group started with the lowest savings rate of the three groups,
around 3.5 percent of income. Under the program, however, their savings
rates steadily rose, and three and a half years and four pay raises later, their
savings rate had almost quadrupled, to 13.6 percent—considerably higher
than the 9 percent savings rate for those who accepted the consultant’s initial recommendation to raise savings by 5 percentage points.
Most of the people who enrolled in the Save More Tomorrow program
stuck with it for the full four raises, whereupon the increases were halted
because the employees had reached the maximum they were allowed to
contribute in the plan. The few employees who did leave the program did
not ask that their savings rates be dropped back to their earlier low levels.
Instead, they just stopped increasing their contribution rates.
In the years since this pilot program, many retirement-plan administrators have adopted the Save More Tomorrow idea, including Vanguard,
T. Rowe Price, tiaa-cref, Fidelity, and Hewitt Associates. Save More
Tomorrow is now available in thousands of employer plans. The Profit
Sharing Council of America reports that as of 2007, 39 percent of large
employers in the United States have adopted some type of automatic escalation plan. As the plan is implemented in various ways, we have been able
to learn more about what makes the program work.
In the first implementation, as we have seen, participation was more than
80 percent, but this was in an environment in which each employee was approached individually by the financial consultant, and the consultant was
able to fill out the relevant forms on the spot. In contrast, participation rates
have been small in some cases in which employees have had to hunt for an
obscure location on a financial-services Web page in order to sign up. Our
main conclusion should not be surprising to anyone who has read this far
into the book: participation rates jump when enrollment is easy. Holding a
seminar to explain the plan helps; having the forms there to fill out helps
even more. (Have we mentioned that channel factors matter?)
The most effective way to increase enrollment in a Save More Tomorrow plan is to combine it with automatic enrollment. The Safelite Group
114 MONEY
was the first to implement automatic enrollment in a Save More Tomorrow plan. The program was introduced to employees in June 2003.
Ninety-three percent of participants took no action and thus were automatically enrolled in the program. In the year following the implementation of the program, only 6 percent actively opted out. Those who stayed
in the program will have significantly more money available for retirement.
More recently, Vanguard has introduced thirteen automatic Save More
Tomorrow enrollment plans.* These programs cover new hires only, and
they are typically set with an initial deferral rate of about 3 percent of pay
and an annual increment of 1 percent of pay. In the twelve months before
the implementation of automatic enrollment, only 23 percent of employees opted into Save More Tomorrow. In the twelve months following
automatic enrollment, 78 percent of the savers were participating in the program. The dramatic change in participation illustrates the power of inertia—and with respect to savings, the crucial role of choice architecture.
The Role of the Government
The initiatives discussed thus far have been entirely a private-sector phenomenon. Firms have tried automatic enrollment without any
nudging from the government. The primary role government needed to
play was getting out of the way by reducing the barriers to adoption of
these programs. To an increasing extent, the federal government has done
exactly that. Beginning in June 1998, Mark Iwry, then a Treasury Department official in charge of national pension policy, directed the Internal
Revenue Service to issue a series of rulings (and official pronouncements)
that defined, approved, and promoted the use of automatic enrollment in
401(k) and other retirement savings plans.
In the summer of 2006 Congress passed the Pension Protection Act,
with enthusiastic backing on both sides of the aisle. The details are complex and boring, so we will put those in an endnote and simply point out
that the law offers employers an incentive to match employee contribuSAVE MORE TOMORROW 115
*By 2007 about fifty more Vanguard clients were in the process of implementing the
program on an opt-out basis.
tions, automatically enroll them in the plan, and automatically increase
their contribution rates over time.15 The incentive is that the employer is
given a waiver from an annoying regulation. Although reasonable people
can quibble with the specific provisions of the bill (which represent the
usual sort of political compromises), we think that it is an excellent example of nudging. Employers are not required to change their plans, but if
they do, they get a reward that actually saves the taxpayers money (because
no one has to read or check the form that no longer has to be completed).
That is not to deny that government can badly blunder. Consider as a
case in point the Social Security Administration. As we mentioned earlier,
being a Social Security participant is a job even the most clueless of Humans can handle because there is one and only one decision to make: when
to start claiming benefits. (The decision about when to start receiving benefits is independent of when to quit working. One can start collecting
while still working and one can stop working and delay collecting.) Generally, a worker is eligible to start claiming benefits when she reaches age
sixty-two. However, she can delay the start until age seventy, and the
longer you wait to start receiving checks, the larger the checks get. Deciding when to start collecting the money is a tricky problem, even for an
economist. Some of the factors that should go into your calculation include:
• How long you expect to live.
• The age, health, working history, and retirement expectations of your
spouse.
• How much money you plan to make in the near future. (If you make
money, then Social Security benefits are heavily taxed.)
• Impatience. The more eager you are to get the money (the higher
your “discount rate” in economics parlance), the sooner you should
start.
The Social Security Administration helpfully sends every American
worker an annual statement that estimates how much she will collect if she
retires at various ages. But for assistance in deciding when to start receiving benefits, participants are referred to the ssa Web page for help. We decided to have a look.
We discovered that the only tool available to help you is something
116 MONEY
called the Break-Even Age calculator.16 This is the tool that is meant to
help you decide whether to start collecting at age sixty-two or wait until,
say, age sixty-six. One might think that this calculator would allow you to
enter some information about the four factors mentioned above that
should influence this choice. Instead, all the calculator does is tell you,
given two possible start dates for receiving payments, how many years you
have to live to “break even.”* The calculator does not take interest, taxes,
spouses, or anything else into account. The ssa might as well give every
senior an abacus.†
If the ssa had a designated choice architect, she could surely do better.
It would be possible to ask a series of questions to get at the important four
factors. (Examples: Are you in good health? Do you plan to keep working?
If so, how much will you make? At what age did your parents die? How old
is your spouse? Is she working?) Then it would be possible to give some
sensible advice—and possibly even a default option. (Hint to financial-service companies: build such a calculator and put it on your Web site.)
Saving for retirement is something that Humans find difficult. They
have to solve a complicated mathematical problem to know how much to
save, and then they have to exert a lot of willpower for a long time to execute this plan. This is an ideal domain for nudging. In an environment in
which people have to make only one decision per lifetime, we should surely
try harder to help them get it right.
SAVE MORE TOMORROW 117
*In other words, it answers the question, Will I have more money in total if I start
taking lower payments now, or if I wait a few years until I can draw higher payments? A
simple example illustrates that this calculation is one that even Humans can make by
themselves. Suppose you can collect $1,000 a month at age sixty-two and $1,500 a
month starting at age sixty-six. Four years (forty-eight months) of collecting $1,000 a
month adds up to $48,000. How many months do you have to collect an extra $500 to
make this up? Ninety-six. Duh.
†We discovered another odd thing about the ssa Web site. It does not operate
twenty-four hours a day. Here are the hours:
Monday through Friday, all day (except 2:00–3:00 a.m.)
Saturday, 5:00 a.m.–11:00 p.m.
Sunday, 8:00 a.m.–10:00 p.m.
Holidays, 5:00 a.m.–11:00 p.m.
We had never heard of a Web site that works government hours (even extended
ones)!
7
NAÏVE INVESTING
118
We have been exploring the first part of saving for retirement:
joining a plan and deciding how much to invest. We now turn to the allimportant second part: how to invest the money.
Once again the switch from defined-benefit to defined-contribution
plans has given employees more control, more options, and more responsibility. Although solving the problem of how much to save is hard, choosing the right portfolio is even harder. In fact, in an effort to make what we
say about it comprehensible, we will simplify the actual problems people
face. Just take our word for it that things are really even harder than we are
letting on.
The first question investors face is this: how much risk to take? As a rule,
riskier investments such as stocks (also called equities) earn higher rates of
return than safer investments such as government bonds or money market
accounts. Choosing the appropriate mix of stocks and bonds (and possibly
other assets such as real estate) is called the asset-allocation decision. If an
investor is willing to allocate more of her money to risky assets, then she
will usually make more money, but of course more risk means taking the
chance that returns will actually be lower. And the decision of how much
to save is related in complex ways to the willingness to bear risk. Someone
who insists on investing everything in a safe money market account that
earns a modest rate of interest had better be saving quite a bit if she wants
to have enough to have a comfortable retirement.
Suppose an investor chooses to invest 70 percent of her money in stocks
and 30 percent in bonds. That choice still leaves open many specific questions of how the money is to be invested. In retirement accounts, most investors do not choose stocks individually but rather invest via mutual
funds. The funds themselves differ in how risky they are, and how much
they charge for their services. Some funds are specialized (investing only in
companies in a particular industry or country, for example) while others
invest broadly. There are also funds designed for one-stop shopping,
blending a mix of stocks and bonds together. Should investors form their
own blend or choose a fund blended for them? Further complicating the
mix is that some companies offer employees the opportunity to invest in
the company’s own shares. Should workers want to own shares in the company they work for?
Making all these decisions is hard work (or should be if done carefully),
and participants might be excused for thinking that having made these
choices they can relax and look forward to a wonderful retirement. However, all these decisions should be revisited periodically. An investor who
chose to invest half her money in stocks and half in bonds could find that
stocks have shot up and two-thirds of her portfolio is now invested in
stocks. Should something be done? Should some of the stocks be sold to
get back to the 50–50 allocation? Or should she put more of her money in
stocks, because they seem to be doing so well? Econs have no trouble with
all these decisions, but Humans can easily become flummoxed. As we will
see, Human investors are making all kinds of mistakes in this domain, and
could benefit from a more helpful and forgiving investment choice architecture.
Stocks and Bonds
How should you decide how much of your portfolio should be invested in stocks? (Do you know how much of your portfolio is invested in
stocks?) Of course you know that stocks have historically earned higher
rates of return, but by how much?
Consider the eighty-year period from 1925 to 2005. If you had invested
a dollar in U.S. Treasury bills (short-term, completely safe, bonds issued
by the government), you would have turned your dollar into $18, a 3.7
percent rate of return per year. That does not seem bad until you realize
NAÏVE INVESTING 119
that just to keep up with inflation you had to earn 3.0 percent per year. If
you had invested your money in longer-term bonds, your dollar would
have become $71, a 5.5 percent rate of return, which is quite a bit better.
But if you had invested in mutual funds that held shares in the largest
American companies (such as an S&P 500 index fund), your dollar would
have grown into $2,658, a 10.4 percent rate of return, and if you had invested in a broad portfolio of the stocks of smaller companies, you could
have earned even more.
In economics jargon, in which stocks are referred to as equities, the difference in the returns between Treasury bills and equities is called the “equity premium.” This premium is considered to be compensation for the
greater risk associated with investing in stocks. Whereas Treasury bills are
guaranteed by the federal government, and are essentially risk free, investments in stocks are risky. Although the average rate of return has been 10
percent, there have been years when stocks have fallen by more than 30
percent, and on October 19, 1987, stock indexes fell 20 percent or more all
around the world in a single day.
How would Econs decide how much of their portfolio to invest in
stocks? An Econ would make a trade-off between risk and return that
would be based on his preferences about retirement income. That is, he
would decide whether the possibility of being, say, 25 percent richer is
worth the risk of being 15 percent poorer. Needless to say, even if it occurred to Humans to think about the problem this way, they would not
know how to make the necessary calculations. The decisions they do make
will differ from those of Econs in two ways. First, they will be unduly influenced by short-term fluctuations, and second, their decisions are likely to
be based on rules of thumb. Let’s consider each in turn.
Countin’ Your Money While Sittin’ at the Table
Recall from Chapter 1 that Humans are loss averse. Roughly speaking, they hate losses about twice as much as they like gains. With this in
mind, consider the behavior of two investors, Vince and Rip. Vince is a
stock broker, and he has constant access to information about the value of
all of his investments. By habit, at the end of each day, he runs a little program to calculate how much money he has made or lost that day. Being
120 MONEY
Human, when Vince loses five thousand dollars in a day he is miserable—
about as miserable as he is happy at the end of a day when he gains ten
thousand dollars. How does Vince feel about investing in stocks? Very nervous! On a daily basis, stocks go down almost as often as they go up, so if
you are feeling the pain of losses much more acutely than the pleasure of
gains, you will hate investing in stocks.
Now compare Vince with his friend and client Rip, a scion of the old
Van Winkle family. In a visit to his doctor Rip is told that he is about to follow the long-standing family tradition and will soon go to sleep for twenty
years. The doctor tells him to make sure he has a comfortable bed, and
suggests that Rip call his broker to make sure his asset allocation is where it
should be. How will Rip feel about investing in stocks? Quite calm! Over a
twenty-year period, stocks are almost certain to go up. (There is no
twenty-year period in history in which stocks have declined in real value, or
have been outperformed by bonds.) So Rip calls Vince, tells him to put all
his money in stocks, and sleeps like a baby.
The lesson from the story of Vince and Rip is that attitudes toward risk
depend on the frequency with which investors monitor their portfolios. As
Kenny Rogers advises in his famous song “The Gambler”: “You never
count your money when you’re sittin’ at the table, / There’ll be time
enough for countin’ when the dealin’s done.” Many investors do not heed
this good advice and invest too little of their money in stocks. We believe
this qualifies as a mistake, because if the investors are shown the evidence
on the risks of stocks and bonds over a long period of time, such as twenty
years (the relevant horizon for many investors), they choose to invest
nearly all of their money in stocks.1
Market Timing: Buy High, Sell Low
Throughout the 1990s, people were increasing the proportion of
their retirement money invested in stocks, both in terms of the percentage
of money contributed each year and the account balances held. What produced this shift in behavior? One (rather remote) possibility was that investors had spent the decade poring over finance and economics journals,
had learned that stock returns had been substantially higher than bond returns over the past century or so, and so decided to invest more in stocks.
NAÏVE INVESTING 121
The other (considerably more likely) possibility is that investors had come
to believe that stocks only go up—or that even if stock prices fall, that is
just another buying opportunity because they quickly rise again. The stock
market provided an opportunity to test these competing hypotheses during the 2000–2002 market turndown.
One way to analyze the market-timing ability of investors is to see how
their asset-allocation decisions (that is, the proportion of their portfolios
invested in stocks) changed over time. The problem with this approach is
that, as we have already mentioned, most people hardly ever change their
portfolios unless they change jobs and have to fill out a new set of forms.
So a better way to judge what people are thinking is to look at the percentage of money being invested in stocks by new participants who have just
made the decision. We have data on one large group of such participants
who were customers of plans administered by the Vanguard mutual fund
company. In 1992 new participants were allocating 58 percent of their assets to equities, and by 2000 that percentage had risen to 74. In the next
two years, however, the allocation to equities for new participants fell back
to 54 percent. Their market timing was backward. They were heavily buying stocks when stock prices were high, and then selling stocks when their
prices were low.
We observe similar behavior in the asset allocations within equities.
Some plans allow investors to choose funds that specialize in particular industries or sectors. We have data from one such plan that offered its employees the option of investing in a technology fund. In 1998, in the early
phase of the rapid run-up in the shares of technology companies, only 12
percent of employees invested in the technology fund. By 2000, when
technology share prices were peaking, 37 percent of employees had money
invested in that fund. After the fall in these share prices, the number of new
participants investing in the technology fund had dropped back down to
18 percent by 2001. Again, participants were buying into the technology
fund most aggressively at the peak, and selling after prices had fallen.
Rules of Thumb
Even the most sophisticated investors can sometimes find the
decision about how to invest their money daunting, and they resort to
122 MONEY
simple rules of thumb. Take the example of the financial economist and
Nobel laureate Harry Markowitz, one of the founders of modern portfolio theory. When asked about how he allocated his retirement account, he
confessed: “I should have computed the historic covariances of the asset
classes and drawn an efficient frontier. Instead . . . I split my contributions
fifty-fifty between bonds and equities.”2
Markowitz was not alone. In the mid-1980s most educators had a
defined-contribution pension plan provided by a company that goes by its
initials, tiaa-cref. At that time the plan had only two options—tiaa,
which invests in fixed-income securities such as bonds, and cref, which
invests mostly in stocks. More than half of the participants in this plan,
many of them professors of some sort, selected exactly a 50–50 split between these two options. One of these 50–50 investors was Sunstein.
Notwithstanding his long-standing friendship with Thaler, who many
years ago told him that over the long haul cref was a better bet than tiaa,
he hasn’t changed a thing. It is on his list of things to do, right after canceling those magazine subscriptions.
Of course, an even split between stocks and bonds is not a self-evidently
dumb portfolio, but if the initial allocation is never changed (or “rebalanced,” in the finance parlance), then over time the mix of assets will depend on the rates of return. For example, Sunstein has been investing
equal amounts into tiaa and cref for more than twenty-five years, and he
now has well over 60 percent of his money in cref. The reason is that
stocks have significantly outperformed bonds over the time period he has
been a professor. If he had invested most of his money in stocks, he would
have done a lot better.
Markowitz’s strategy can be viewed as one example of what might be
called the diversification heuristic. “When in doubt, diversify.” Don’t put
all your eggs in one basket. In general, diversification is a great idea, but
there is a big difference between sensible diversification and the naïve kind.
A special case of this rule of thumb is what might be called the “1/n”
heuristic: “When faced with ‘n’ options, divide assets evenly across the options.”3 Put the same number of eggs in each basket.
Naïve diversification apparently starts young. Consider the following
clever experiment conducted by Daniel Read and George Loewenstein on
Halloween night.4 The “subjects” were trick-or-treaters. In one condiNAÏVE INVESTING 123
tion, the children approached two adjacent houses and were offered a
choice between the same two candy bars (Three Musketeers and Milky
Way) at each house. In the other condition, they approached a single
house, where they were asked to “choose whichever two candy bars you
like.” Large piles of both candies were displayed to ensure that the children would not think it was rude to take two of the same. The two conditions produced quite different results. In the house with both kinds of
candy, every child selected one of each candy. In contrast, only 48 percent
of the children picked one of each candy when they were choosing in sequence in two houses.
Although the consequences of picking two different candies are minimal (Three Musketeers and Milky Way are both pretty good), naïve diversification in portfolio selection can have more significant consequences
on what people do, and on how much money they end up having. In a revealing study, university employees were asked how they would invest their
retirement money if they had just two funds to choose from.5 In one condition, one of the funds invested entirely in stocks, the other in bonds.
Most of the participants chose to invest their money half and half, achieving an asset allocation of 50 percent stocks. Another group was told that
one fund invested entirely in stocks and the other “balanced” fund invested half in stocks and half in bonds. People in this group could have also
have invested 50 percent of their money in stocks by putting all their
money in the balanced fund. Instead, they followed the 1/n rule and divided their money evenly between the two funds—ending up with mostly
stocks. People in a third group were given a choice between a balanced
fund and a bond fund. Well, you can guess what they did.
This result implies that the set of funds offered in a particular plan can
greatly influence the choices participants make. To test this prediction, Benartzi and Thaler (2001) examined behavior in retirement saving plans of
170 companies. They found that the more stock funds the plan offered, the
greater was the percentage of participants’ money invested in stocks.
Many plans have attempted to help participants deal with the difficult
problem of portfolio construction by offering “lifestyle” funds that blend
stocks and bonds in a way designed to meet the needs of different levels of
risk tolerance. For example, an employer might offer three lifestyle funds:
conservative, moderate, and aggressive. These funds are already diversi124 MONEY
fied, so individuals need pick only the fund that fits their risk preference.
Some funds also adjust the asset allocation with the age of the participant.
Such a fund assortment is a good idea and represents an excellent set of
default options (if the fees are reasonable). But when the funds are just included in a mix of other funds, many people appear not to understand how
to use them. For example, few participants put all of their money into one
of these funds, even though that is the mission for which they were designed. This is the equivalent of a not-particularly-hungry diner going to a
restaurant that offers a set five-course menu and ordering the set menu
plus the roast duck and a dessert. One study investigated the behavior of
participants in a plan that offered three lifestyle funds and six other funds
(an index fund, a growth fund, a bond fund, and so on).6 Curiously, the
participants who invested in the conservative lifestyle fund allocated just 31
percent to that fund, dividing the rest among the other funds. Because the
menu of other funds is dominated by stock funds, the resulting stock exposure for those investing in the conservative fund was 77 percent. These
participants end up with a fairly aggressive portfolio, probably without being aware of it.
Company Stock
Consider the case of Charlie Prestwood, who spent his best years
in the Texas energy business. He started at the bottom in 1967, sweeping
sidewalks and emptying trash cans for a company called Houston Natural
Gas. He was still there in 1985 when the company’s ceo, a Houston native
named Kenneth Lay, engineered its sale to a Nebraska-based competitor
called Internorth. Lay helped restructure the new company, Enron, which
distributed electricity and gas throughout the United States. “My job on
the pipeline was keeping the gas flowing to our customers,” says Prestwood. “I worked all my life devoted to it.”
Life as an Enron employee was good. Prestwood’s annual salary rose
steadily to sixty-five thousand dollars, with additional retirement benefits
paid in Enron stock. When Houston Natural and Internorth had merged,
all of Prestwood’s investments were automatically converted to Enron
stock. He continued to set aside money in the company’s retirement fund,
buying even more stock. Internally, the company relentlessly promoted
NAÏVE INVESTING 125
employee stock ownership. Newsletters touted Enron’s growth as “simply
stunning,” and Lay, at company events, urged employees to buy more
stock. To Prestwood, it didn’t seem like a problem that his future was tied
directly to Enron’s. Enron had committed to him, and he was showing his
gratitude. “To me, this is the American way, loyalty to your employer,” he
says.
Prestwood was loyal to the bitter end. When he retired in 2000, he had
accumulated 13,500 shares of Enron stock, worth $1.3 million at their
peak. Then, at age sixty-eight, Prestwood suddenly lost his entire Enron
nest egg. He now survives on a previous employer’s pension of $521 a
month and a Social Security check of $1,294. “There ain’t no such thing as
a dream anymore,” he says. He lives on a three-acre farm north of Houston willed to him as a baby in 1938 after his mother died. “I hadn’t planned
much for the retirement. Wanted to go fishing, hunting. I was gonna
travel a little.” Now he’ll sell his family’s land. Has to, he says. He is still
paying off his mortgage.7
In some respects, Prestwood’s case is not unusual. Often people do not
diversify at all, and sometimes employees invest a lot of their money in
their employer’s stock. Amazing but true: five million Americans have
more than 60 percent of their retirement savings in company stock.8 This
concentration is risky on two counts. First, a single security is much riskier
than the portfolios offered by mutual funds. Second, as employees of Enron and WorldCom discovered the hard way, workers risk losing both their
jobs and the bulk of their retirement savings all at once.
Remarkably, many employees still do not think these risks apply to their
own employer. There are three problems here. First, employees do not
seem to understand the risk-and-return profile of company stock. When
the Boston Research Group surveyed 401(k) participants in 2002, it found
that despite a high level of awareness of the Enron experience, half of the
respondents thought that their own company stock carried the same or
less risk than a money market fund. Another recent survey found that only
a third of the respondents who owned company stock realized that it is
riskier than a “diversified fund with many different stocks.”9
Second, plan participants tend to extrapolate past performance into the
future. Employees of companies whose stock has been performing well
over the previous ten years tend to invest much more in company stock
126 MONEY
than employees at firms that were performing poorly. But this past performance is no prediction of the future. You might think that employees have
especially good information about their firm’s future prospects, but a careful study by Shlomo Benartzi (2001) finds otherwise. Specifically, there is
no correlation between the allocation to company stock and subsequent
stock performance. So workers at firms such as Enron, whose stock had
been flying high, kept pouring more of their money into the company’s
stock (with encouragement from management) right up until the day the
company imploded, and the stock became worthless.
Third, employees who receive an employer’s matching contribution in
company stock view that contribution as implicit advice. In particular,
those who are required to take the employer’s match in the form of company stock allocate 29 percent of their discretionary contributions—that
is, the money they have control over—to company stock. By contrast,
those who have the option, but not the requirement, to take the employer’s match in the form of company stock allocate only 18 percent of their
own funds to company stock.10
How risky is it to hold the shares of a single stock rather than a diversified portfolio? According to estimates by the economist Lisa Meulbroek (2002), a dollar in company stock is worth less than half the value of
a dollar in a mutual fund! In other words, when firms foist company stock
onto their employees, it is like paying them fifty cents on the dollar. The
upshot is that, in general, workers would be much better off with a diversified mutual fund than with company stock. (Hint: if you have more
than 10 percent of your retirement money invested in the company you
work for, diversify as quickly as possible.)
What nudges can help with this problem?11 We prefer libertarian approaches, but we must acknowledge that a nonlibertarian argument can be
made for limiting the percentage of an employee’s retirement portfolio
that is held in company stock—say, to 10 percent. Bills to this effect have
been introduced in Congress. A more libertarian alternative is to treat
company stock like any other investment in a 401(k) plan. Company stock
in defined-contribution plans now enjoys an important benefit under the
principal federal fiduciary law, an extremely important and largely unintelligible statute named the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of
1974 (erisa). Erisa sets forth three fiduciary principles for retirementNAÏVE INVESTING 127
plan investments: the exclusive benefit rule, requiring that plans be managed exclusively for the benefit of participants; the prudence rule, requiring that plan assets be invested according to a “prudent investor” standard; and the diversification rule, requiring that plan assets be diversified
so as to minimize the risk of large losses. Most notably, company stock is
exempted from the diversification requirement in defined-contribution
plans—largely because, at the time erisa was passed, large employers with
profit-sharing plans lobbied Congress to exempt them from the diversification requirements imposed on defined-benefit plans.12 Employers are
still expected to act prudently, however, in determining whether company
stock is a suitable investment.
Why did Congress give preferred standing to company stock? No sensible definition of prudence can accommodate a concentrated position in a
single stock—especially if that stock’s performance is correlated with participants’ work earnings. By giving company stock this odd preferential
treatment, existing law actually encourages the inclusion of company stock
in 401(k) plans. From the standpoint of workers’ welfare, this is perverse.
A natural alternative would be to treat company stock just like every other
investment, without any kind of preference. This simple change might, in
and of itself, solve the problem because firms might conclude that the
fiduciary risk of giving large amounts of company stock to employees is
not worth bearing.
In the absence of a change in the law, public-spirited firms can take some
steps themselves to nudge employees to reduce exceptionally large holdings of company stock. Here is an approach that will now be familiar: Sell
More Tomorrow. The idea is to solve two problems. First, even if firms
recognize that company stock is not so great for employees, they do not
want all or most employees to sell their stock at once, for fear that such
sales will lower the stock’s price. Second, firms do not want to be signaling
that they think their stock is a bad investment. The Sell More Tomorrow
plan gives employees the option to sell off their shares gradually over a
period of time (say, three years), with the proceeds directed into a diversified portfolio. The program could be done on either an opt-in or opt-out
basis.
128 MONEY
Nudges
Through better choice architecture, plans can help their participants on many dimensions. Attention to choice architecture has become
increasingly important over the years because plans have greatly increased
the number of options they offer, making it even harder for people to
choose well.
Defaults
Historically, most defined-contribution plans did not have a default option. Participants who joined the plan would be given a list of options, with the instructions to allocate their money as they wished among
the funds offered. No default option was necessary until plans began to
adopt automatic enrollment, a regime that requires a default: if participants are enrolled automatically, they have to be enrolled into some
specific asset allocation. Traditionally, firms have selected their most conservative investment option as the default, usually a money market account.
Most specialists consider a 100 percent allocation to a money market account to be much too conservative. The combination of the low rates of
return earned in these funds (barely above inflation) and the low savings
rates by many employees is simply a recipe for being poor when you get
old. Firms chose this option not because they thought it was smart but because they were worried about getting sued if they defaulted employees
into something more sensible (but riskier). This fear was exacerbated by
the reluctance of the Department of Labor to issue guidelines officially
blessing (by granting a “safe harbor” status) any fund that could ever decline in value. The Department of Labor has finally issued new guidelines
that are quite sensible, so the legal impediment to choosing a good default
fund should no longer exist.
Many good default options are available. One alternative is to offer a
set of model portfolios that have varying degrees of risk. We have noted
that some plan sponsors offer conservative, moderate, and aggressive
“lifestyle” portfolios. All a participant needs to do is select the lifestyle
fund that best fits his risk preferences. Another option available to plan
sponsors is to offer plan participants “target maturity funds.” Target maNAÏVE INVESTING 129
turity funds typically have a year in their name, like 2010, 2030, or 2040. A
participant simply selects the fund that matches her expected retirement
date. Managers of the target maturity funds select the degree of risk and
gradually shift the allocation away from stocks and toward conservative investments as the target date approaches.
Some vendors and plan sponsors have started to offer automated solutions for portfolio selection. In particular, some plan sponsors automatically assign participants to a target maturity fund based on a standard retirement age. Others are defaulting participants into “managed accounts,”
which are typically portfolios of stocks and bonds whose allocations are
based on the age of the participants and possibly other information.
Structuring Complex Choices
A 401(k) plan is an excellent domain in which to offer a process for
making decisions that fit the needs of participants who have various levels
of interest and sophistication. Here is an outline of a promising approach.
New enrollees would be told that if they do not want to select their own
investment plan, they can choose the default fund that has been selected
with some care by knowledgeable experts. This might be the managed account discussed above. Participants who want to be somewhat more involved would be offered a choice among a small set of balanced or lifecycle funds (with the intention that each participant would invest all her
money in a single fund). For those who wanted to get really involved, a full
menu of mutual funds would be offered, allowing sophisticated investors
(or those who believe themselves to be sophisticated) the ability to invest
as exotically as they choose. Many firms are starting to implement plans
much like this.
Expect Error
To help those who would not get it together to join, we encourage
automatic enrollment, which we would combine with Save More Tomorrow to help people achieve an adequate savings rate. For those who did not
invest in a life-cycle fund, we would recommend offering an automatic rebalancing plan so that a participant’s asset allocation would be adjusted
over time.
130 MONEY
Mappings and Feedback
Most employees have difficulty understanding how numbers like
savings rates, expected rates of return, and volatility translate into changes
in their lifestyle when they are old. These abstract concepts can be brought
into focus by offering translations into concepts anyone can understand.
For example, one might create pictures of various housing options that
would be available with alternative levels of retirement income. For the
lowest outcome, the participant would be shown a very small, possibly rundown apartment. For higher outcomes, larger homes with swimming
pools. These visual displays could be incorporated into regular feedback to
participants about how they are doing in reaching their retirement savings
goals. So a participant could be told in his annual report that he is currently
headed for the hovel, but if he increases his savings rate now (or joins Save
More Tomorrow), he could still get to the two-bedroom condo.
Incentives
The primary incentive problems in this context are possible conflicts of interest between the employer and the employee. The issues regarding company stock are a good example. The erisa laws already require firms to act in the best interest of the employees. These laws should
be enforced.
Forming and managing an investment portfolio over a long period of
years is difficult. Most firms ask a team of internal experts, helped by outside consultants, to perform this task for the assets they manage. But individual participants typically undertake this task on their own, or with the
help of a coworker or relative who may have intuition but lack training for
the job. The end result is similar to what might be expected if most of us
tried to cut our own hair—a mess. Most people need some help; good
choice architecture and carefully selected nudges can go a long way.
NAÏVE INVESTING 131
8
CREDIT MARKETS
132
As we mentioned in Chapter 6, Americans are now borrowing
more than they are saving. And it should not be surprising to learn that
Human consumers are not any more sophisticated about their borrowing
than they are about their investing. Consider Homer Simpson’s experience when leasing a recreational vehicle called a Canyonero.
canyonero salesman: Okay, here’s how your lease breaks
down. This is your down payment, then here’s your monthly,
annnnnnnnnd, there’s your weekly.
homer: And that’s it, right?
salesman: Yup . . . oh, then after your final monthly payment
there’s the routine cbp, or Crippling Balloon Payment.
homer: But that’s not for a while, right?
salesman: Right!
homer: Sweet!1
Homer’s naïveté is less unusual, and more revealing, than it might seem.
Let’s examine three important lending markets—mortgages, student
loans, and credit cards—to see whether some nudges might help the many
Homers among us.
Mortgages
Once upon a time shopping for a mortgage was pretty easy. Most
mortgages had a fixed rate for the life of the mortgage, typically thirty
years. Most borrowers provided a 20 percent down payment. In this
regime, comparing loans was a snap—just pick the loan with the lowest interest rate. This task was made especially easy with the passage of the
choice-friendly Truth in Lending Act (also known as Regulation Z), which
required all lenders to report interest rates the same way, using what is
called the annual percentage rate (apr). At the time, the Truth in Lending
Act was an excellent bit of choice architecture because it made it easy to
compare loans. In the absence of a simple way, such as apr, to judge loans,
evaluating various mortgage options is quite difficult. A study by Suzanne
Shu (2007) finds that even mba students at a top school had difficulty
picking out the best loans, and this was in a task that was much simpler
than the one they would encounter in the real world.
Mortgage shopping has now become much more complicated. Borrowers can choose from a variety of fixed-rate loans (for which the interest rate
does not change over the life of the loan), and also numerous “variablerate” loans in which the interest rate goes up and down according to
movements in the market. Borrowers might also consider such exotic
products as interest-only loans, under which the borrower makes no payments toward the principal on the loan, meaning that it is never paid off
unless the house is sold (with luck, at a profit) or the borrower either wins
the lottery or refinances the loan. Many variable-rate mortgages are further complicated by so-called teaser rates—a low interest rate applies for a
period of a year or two, after which the rate (and payments) go up, sometimes dramatically. Then there is the matter of fees, which can vary greatly;
points, which are fixed payments the borrower makes in order to receive a
lower interest rate; and prepayment penalties that must be paid if the loan
is repaid early. In this world, choosing a mortgage makes picking a retirement portfolio look easy. And the stakes are just as big.
Here as elsewhere, the addition of more options has the potential to
make people better off, but this potential is realized only if they are able to
do a good job of picking the loan that is best suited to their situation and
preferences. How do people do in shopping for mortgages? A study by the
economist Susan Woodward (2007) examined more than seven thousand
loans insured by the Federal Housing Administration (fha), a government agency that insures smaller loans and allows low down payments.
Woodward studied which kinds of borrowers got the best deals, and under
CREDIT MARKETS 133
what circumstances, after controlling for risk and other factors. Here are
some of her key findings:
• African-American borrowers pay an additional $425 for their loans.
Latino borrowers pay an additional $400. (The average fee for all borrowers was $3,133 on loans that averaged about $105,000.)
• Borrowers who live in neighborhoods where adults have only a high
school education pay $1,160 more for their loans than borrowers who
live in neighborhoods where adults have a college education.
• Loans made by mortgage brokers are more expensive than those
made by direct lenders by about $600.
• Sources of loan complexity such as points and seller contributions to
closing costs (which can make comparing loans more difficult) are expensive for borrowers, and the additional cost is greater on brokered
loans than on direct loans.
We can take some general lessons from this analysis. When markets get
more complicated, unsophisticated and uneducated shoppers will be especially disadvantaged by the complexity. The unsophisticated shoppers are
also more likely to be given bad or self-interested advice by people serving
in roles that appear to be helpful and purely advisory. In this market, mortgage brokers who cater to rich clients probably have a greater incentive to
establish a reputation for fair dealing. By contrast, mortgage brokers who
cater to the poor are often more interested in making a quick buck.*
These factors are exacerbated in the segment of the market that caters to
the poorest and highest-risk borrowers, the so-called subprime market. As
is often the case, there are two extreme views about subprime loans. Some,
particularly those left of center or in the news media, label all such loans
with the derogatory term predatory. This broad brush fails to recognize
the obvious fact that higher-risk loans will have to have higher interest
134 MONEY
*One brief aside here: economists often argue that when the stakes go up, people
will have an incentive to get expert advice. That statement is surely true, but it does not
follow that they will actually ask for and get helpful advice. In the mortgage market,
many people mistakenly think that the mortgage broker is providing this service, but
the broker is hardly an unbiased source. In no way do we mean to single out mortgage
brokers in this respect. The poor are often fleeced by people pretending to be providing a service.
rates to compensate the people who lend the money. The fact that poor
and risky borrowers pay higher interest rates does not make these loans
“predatory.” In fact, the microfinance loans in developing countries that
led to a well-deserved Nobel Peace Prize for Muhammad Yunus in 2006
often come with interest rates of 200 percent or more, yet the borrowers
are made better off by these loans.2 On the other side, some observers
think that the hue and cry about predatory lending is based entirely on the
failure of left-leaning journalists and others to understand that risky loans
require higher interest rates. As usual, the truth lies somewhere between
the two extremes. Subprime lending is neither all good nor all bad.
The good feature of subprime lending is that it offers credit to those
who could not otherwise borrow, and makes it possible for some poor or
high-risk families to become homeowners (or business owners). Subprime
loans also give people a valuable second chance. Subprime lenders provide
funding for any large purchase. More often than not, these purchases help
people achieve an American dream—better home ownership. In fact, the
vast majority of subprime loans are either refinanced mortgages or home
equity loans.
In what sense then are subprime loans really predatory? Subprime borrowers are often unsophisticated, and they are sometimes exploited by
brokers. A front-page story in the Wall Street Journal described in some
detail the behavior of one such broker, Altaf Shaikh, a onetime professional cricket player turned pushy mortgage lender.3 Shaikh, who jumped
from one mortgage company to another, made a long series of loans that
greatly profited him but were generally less beneficial to his customers. For
the type of borrowers Shaikh favored, here is the typical pattern. The borrowers are approached by the broker, who acts like he is doing them a favor, and so they may not do much shopping. Solicitation can be in person
or via mail or nearly any other medium. For example, a home-improvement contractor might stop by a house to suggest a renovation, and then
conveniently refer the residents to a mortgage broker.
At the follow-up meeting, the broker suggests different mortgages to
the prospective borrower. Here the borrower can “choose” the interest
rate, monthly payment, and number of points she wants to pay. This last
choice is particularly confusing: points allow borrowers to pay a fee (an
amount that is added to the loan because the borrower typically borrows
CREDIT MARKETS 135
money to pay for the points) in exchange for a lower interest rate, but few
borrowers are capable of figuring out whether the points are worth paying.
(Hint: usually they are not.)
Once the borrower agrees to a particular mortgage, the law requires
that a “good-faith estimate” be presented, spelling out all the costs of the
loan, including the fee being paid to the broker. Although this estimate
must be shown to the borrower within three days of the initial application,
it is sometimes withheld until right before the borrower signs the mortgage. At that point, the estimate will be part of a huge pile of papers that
are more often shuffled than read. This defeats the whole purpose of the
estimate. The same problem occurs at closing. The broker brings a stack of
papers for the borrower to look through and sign. Even though these
forms describe the terms and conditions of the mortgage, signing the paperwork is a formality for most people. At such a late stage, most borrowers are not in any position to rethink (or, for that matter, think).
Ironically, part of this problem was brought on by good intentions. The
Truth in Lending Act was originally intended to summarize the terms of
the loan in clear terms. But it is hard to see “truth” when it is buried in a
mountain of fine print. For high-risk loans, a Home Ownership and Equity Protection Act disclosure is supposed to give extra warning to the borrower. But the disclosure form doesn’t explicitly say “high-risk,” and the
borrower simply needs to sign the form. As anyone who has ever bought a
house knows, there are many forms to sign, and buyers often just start
signing without doing much reading.
Other confusing forms make it difficult for a borrower to distinguish between the loan itself and the fees involved. Mortgage forms have hundreds
of lines, and the numbers that clutter the form can obscure various
charges. Many of the fees aren’t defined. Some borrowers do not know
that they will be charged more if they pay off their mortgage ahead of
time—that is, they will face a prepayment penalty. And it doesn’t help that
most subprime loans have variable rates that further complicate the problem of understanding the transaction.
In 2007 there was an eruption of subprime foreclosures, which caused
ripples throughout financial markets, prompting many government bodies to think harder about how to help. Of course markets, left alone, will
solve some of the problem, because investors who had been buying up
136 MONEY
subprime loans learned the hard way that the loans were riskier than they
seemed. (In many ways, the mortgage brokers were deceiving the investors who bought up the loans as well as the people who borrowed the
money.) But market forces did not prevent the problem from occurring, so
there have been calls for more intervention. Some demand an end to
predatory lending, but because loans do not come stamped “predatory,” it
is hard to implement any such ban without depriving many deserving but
high-risk borrowers from any source of financing. And of course, we libertarian paternalists do not favor bans. Instead, we prefer an improvement in
choice architecture that will help people make better choices and avoid
loans that really are predatory—loans that exploit people’s ignorance,
confusion, and vulnerability. In fact, we think that the entire mortgage
market could benefit from a major upgrade in choice architecture.
The basic problem is that the old Truth in Lending Act is now hopelessly inadequate. When interest rates vary and there are myriad fees to pay,
just looking at the apr is far from enough. The law professor Lauren
Wilkins (2006) suggests one strategy for reform, which is to limit the set of
permissible mortgages in order to make comparison easier. This would involve banning mortgages with such features as negative amortization or
balloon payments; in these mortgages, large payments are due at the end
because the mortgage and interest have not been fully paid over the term.
The idea is that if there were fewer types of mortgages—for example, only
thirty-year fixed-rate loans—then borrowers would have an easier time
choosing wisely. Wilkins thinks that the costs of these exotic mortgages
outweigh the benefits. Wilkins also proposes that the loan estimate must
remain valid for thirty days and that the borrower must wait before purchasing a loan. Although we see some merit in this proposal, and are sympathetic with the goal of making shopping easier, Wilkins’s proposal does
not qualify as libertarian paternalism because it prohibits contracts that
may be mutually beneficial. Variable-rate mortgages, even with teaser
rates, are not inherently bad. For those who are planning to sell their house
or refinance within a few years, these mortgages can be highly attractive.
Instead, we think that a version of our recap plan can help. We have in
mind two versions of recap in this domain. In the simplified form, mortgage lenders would be required to report lending costs in two categories:
fees and interest. In a version of such a report suggested by Wilkins, all the
CREDIT MARKETS 137
different types of fees would be reported, but they would be added up into
a single salient number.
Woodward’s research finds that the people who get the best deals—by a
lot!—are those who pay no fee up front. (This just means that the broker
pays all the fees out of his commission. There may be occasional free
lunches, but there is no such thing as a free mortgage.) The likely explanation for this result is that when the fee is zero, it is simpler for borrowers to
compare terms, because the interest rate is the only thing they have to look
at. The interest-rate disclosure would include the rate, of course, but also
a schedule of payments over a period of years, assuming that the underlying interest rates do not change. This would ensure that borrowers at least
know what their payments will be when the teaser rate ends. It would be a
good idea to add some kind of worst-case scenario information so that
borrowers can see how much their payments could go up in the future.
Lenders would also have to provide a machine-readable detailed recap
report, one that incorporates all the fees and interest rate provisions, including teaser rates, what the variable-rate changes are linked to, caps on
the changes per year, and so forth. This information would allow independent third parties to offer much better advice. Our strong hunch is that if
the recap data were made available, third-party services would emerge to
compare lenders. Care would need to be taken that the system did not foster collusion, but we think this would be easy enough to monitor and prevent.
Recap data would thus make it much easier to shop for mortgages online, which should make the mortgage market more competitive. Online
shopping is especially likely to help women and minority groups. A study
of automobile shopping found that women and African-Americans pay
about the same amount as white males when they buy a car online, but at
the dealership they pay more, even after you account for other factors, such
as income.4
Student Loans
The cost of going to college has been rising almost as fast as the
cost of health care and rare baseball cards. At many private universities, including ours, it costs a student more than fifty thousand dollars a year in
138 MONEY
tuition, room, and board. Scholarships and part-time jobs typically do not
cover the cost of college. So students and their families often turn to student loans to help out. In fact, loans are a common option. About twothirds of four-year college students are in debt when they graduate.
There are two kinds of loans in the marketplace: purely private loans
given by financial institutions, and loans that are backed by the federal government, so-called Stafford loans. These Stafford loans are need-based.
The government pays the interest on the loans while the student is in
school, guarantees payment to the lender if the student defaults, and subsidizes the loans. Lenders find making these loans highly profitable.
Unfortunately, student borrowers and their families face the same kinds
of difficulties as subprime borrowers. Similarly misleading mail solicitations come from private lenders, aimed at a younger audience. Some of
these solicitations are hilarious in their absurdity, but apparently they’re effective too. For example, one of the dozens of loan flyers that our student
intern received in the mail during her senior year of high school suggested
that getting a loan of forty thousand dollars could be as easy as ordering a
pizza, and pictured a pizza chef promising a “Decision delivered within 15
minutes!”
Shopping for a student loan is nearly as complicated as looking for a
mortgage. Students typically try for a federal loan because they are cheaper
(a fact not mentioned by the pizza man in the ad), then look at private
loans if necessary. To apply for a federal loan a student must first fill out the
free application for federal student aid (fafsa). If the student has also applied for financial aid at a private college, she must also complete the College Board’s financial aid profile. Each form contains more than a hundred
questions that vary according to the schools involved, and filling one out
takes many hours. (Some high school and college students joke that it
takes longer than the college application itself.)
Like a typical mortgage form, the scale of these questionnaires is overwhelming. Students are asked to answer questions about their parents’
finances, even if they don’t know much about them. After the forms have
been filled out, the Department of Education determines how much the
student’s family can pay for college (called the expected family contribution). From there, the college decides on the size of the loan.
Alternatively, the student can go to the private sector for a loan. By
CREDIT MARKETS 139
sending proof of college enrollment to the lender, a student can receive as
much money as she thinks is necessary. Unlike federal loans, this money
can be used for any expenses, so direct-to-consumer loans could potentially encourage students to borrow too much and to overspend.
As in the case of mortgages, where a borrower often naïvely asks advice
from his mortgage broker, students and their parents have traditionally
turned to their colleges’ financial aid offices for advice. Of course, most
such offices are helpful and honest. Alas, some of them have been no more
scrupulous than the cricket player turned mortgage broker. The loan officers offer advice, all right, but instead of a well-intentioned nudge, the advice has often been a self-serving shove. Some colleges’ financial aid offices
have tag-teamed with lenders who had provided gifts, stock options, and
“donations” to the college in order to become “preferred lenders”—a
kind of “Good Housekeeping” stamp for student loans.5 Occasionally, a
college’s financial aid staff tells students that they may choose only lenders
on a “preferred” list, even if these lenders don’t necessarily provide loans in
the best interest of the student. At one university, a lender was allowed to
provide staff for a call center under a college’s name; when students called
in to ask about loans, those “unbiased” employees pushed their own company’s loans. When students took out these loans, the lender kindly shared
profits with the college.
One might wonder why lenders are so eager to get the student loan
business that they are willing to engage in practices that are at least sleazy
and possibly illegal. The answer is that the combination of loan guarantee
and subsidy by the government makes these loans exceptionally profitable,
so lenders compete hard to get the business. Presumably, it was the hope
of such competition that led the government to design the program in this
partially privatized manner, in which the federal government hands out
subsidies but relies on the private sector to distribute the loans. However,
the competition has not focused on price. Instead, the lenders have engaged in what economists call rent-seeking activities. The idea is that if
there are high profits to be made, suppliers will be willing to spend a lot of
time and money to get that business. Because excess profits are available to
the lenders who snag the student loan business, there are temptations to
do whatever it takes to get to the head of the line.
As with mortgages, this example illustrates the problem with directing
140 MONEY
people to seek “expert” advice when they face difficult, high-stakes problems and are confused about what to do. If they don’t just reply to the
pizza ad because it is easy, but instead try to get helpful advice, they may
end up with suggestions that are as self-serving as the pizza man’s. The adviser they consult has a treasure—confused customers. The opportunity to
fleece confused customers is valuable. There is money on the table. It is
difficult to design public policies that inhibit “advisers” from taking that
money. Better to inform the consumer by improving the choice architecture. If borrowers could compare loans more easily, then the price competition that was hoped for might actually emerge.
One helpful nudge would be to simplify the financial aid application.
The complicated format of these forms can discourage students from applying for financial aid and cause them to seek pricey direct-to-consumer
loans instead. Although the Department of Education has not released a
specific formula for how it determines how much aid a family should receive, an application of recap to student loans would start with cutting
down the number of questions on the fafsa and making them uniform for
all loans, federal and private.
The fafsa application could also be combined with an annual tax return. In one ongoing Ohio study, tax professionals at H&R Block offer a
fafsa software package to families likely to qualify for federal or state
financial aid. This software uses the tax return to complete most of the
fafsa for submission.6 A recap policy would make it much easier for students to compare various loan options offered through their school. Indeed, learning to use a student loan recap spreadsheet might be an excellent assignment in a high school math class for seniors.
Another possibility would be to help families avoid loans altogether, or
at least reduce the need for such loans, by helping them start saving for
college earlier via college savings accounts (“529 plans”). In research in
progress by Eric Bettinger, Bridget Long, and Phil Oreopoulos, eighth
graders and their parents must meet with school counselors and receive a
small nudge. At the meetings, families are offered the option of directly
depositing money from a checking account into a college savings account
each month. As an incentive, they receive one hundred dollars in savings
for signing up. Through this process, families could conveniently save
money for college.7
CREDIT MARKETS 141
Credit Cards
The credit card is a ubiquitous feature of modern life. It is nearly
impossible to function in society without one. Try checking into a hotel,
renting a car, or renting a set of golf clubs without a credit card. Good
luck. Credit cards serve two functions. First, they provide a mode of payment in lieu of cash, and have largely replaced checks for that purpose in
face-to-face transactions—thankfully—although occasionally you still get
stuck behind someone in a grocery store checkout line who wants to write
a check for a $7.37 purchase. The second purpose of a credit card is to provide a ready source of liquidity if you want to spend more than you currently have in cash. Debit cards, which look just like credit cards, serve
only the first function, because they are linked to a bank account and do
not allow for borrowing unless linked also to a line of credit. (Warning:
some debit cards offer lines of credit at high fees. If you use a debit card to
borrow, you should make sure that the fees you pay are lower than they
would be with a credit card.)
Credit cards are blessedly convenient. Paying with a credit card is often
faster than paying with cash, and lets you avoid struggling with change;
digging into your pocket to find the correct change and managing the
large jar of pennies at home are vexations from which you are liberated.
Not to mention the frequent flyer miles! But if you are not careful, credit
cards can be addicting. Consider these numbers:
• The Census Bureau reported that there were more than 1.4 billion
credit cards in 2004 for 164 million cardholders—an average of 8.5
cards per cardholder.
• Currently, 115 million Americans carry a month-to-month credit card
debt.
• In 1989 the average American family owed its credit card companies
$2,697; by 2007 that number had grown to about $8,000. And these
figures are probably too low because they are generally self-reported.
Using Federal Reserve data, some researchers suggest that American
households may have an average credit card debt of $12,000. At typical interest rates of 18 percent per year, that translates into more than
$2,000 a year in interest payments alone.8
142 MONEY
Looking back at the problems of self-control discussed in Chapter 3, we
can see how credit cards create serious problems for some people. In the
pre–credit card era, households were pretty much forced to use a pay-asyou-go accounting system. That is why people used jars of money labeled
according to purpose or payee. Now if you don’t have the cash to fill your
car up with gas, there is always your credit card. Credit cards inhibit selfcontrol in other ways. One study by Drazen Prelec and Duncan Simister
(2001) found that people were willing to pay twice as much to bid on tickets to a Boston Celtics basketball game if they could pay with their credit
card rather than cash. There is no telling how much money people pay
with the cards in order to get those precious frequent flyer miles. And
when the spending limit on one card is reached, there is always another
card to use, or a new account can be opened using one of the solicitations
that arrive almost daily in the mail announcing that you have been “preapproved.”
Can libertarian paternalism help? As with mortgages, we think this is a
perfect area for recap. We suggest that credit card companies should be
required to send an annual statement, both hard copy and electronic, that
lists and totals all the fees that have been incurred over the course of the
year. This report would serve two purposes. First, credit card users could
use the electronic version of the report to shop for better deals. By knowing their precise usage and fee payments, customers would get a better
sense of what they are paying for.
Here is one example. One way credit card companies have slyly raised
prices is by reducing the number of days you have between the time you
get your bill and the day your payment is due. If you miss that payment
you not only pay a penalty, but you also pay interest on all the purchases
you make next month, even if you normally pay off your bill in full. For a
heavy credit card user, such as a frequent business traveler, missing a five
thousand–dollar payment by one day can result in an extra payment of
more than one hundred dollars.
Second, the report would make more salient to users just how much
they are paying over the course of the year. Some credit cards now issue an
annual summary of purchases, listed by category, which can help for tax
preparation, but the recap requirement would force the card issuers to inCREDIT MARKETS 143
clude information on their own fees in this document. Often those fees are
hidden. For example, if you make a purchase in a foreign currency, the
credit card company tacks on a fee for converting the purchase into dollars
(something that costs banks virtually nothing). On your recap statement
you would be told how much you paid for the privilege of using your card
on your vacation to Mexico. Because interest on credit cards is not deductible, there is no particular reason for users to check how much they
paid in interest last year on all their credit cards, and fees are likely to be
buried and ignored altogether. Imagine the wakeup call for a credit card
user who is told that over the past year he paid $2,153 in interest, $247 in
late fees, and $57 in currency transaction fees.
Some other nudges could help as well. For example, credit cards always
mention the minimum payment you can make when you receive your
monthly bill. This can serve as an anchor, and as a nudge that this minimum payment is an appropriate amount.* Of course, because the minimum payments are tiny relative to the total bill, paying this amount just
maximizes the interest payments over time. Credit card companies even
make it hard to commit yourself to paying the card off in full each month.
Try to set up an automatic payment feature with your credit card and your
bank. Chances are the only default option offered is to pay the minimum
payment, not the entire bill. We think that companies should be required
to allow automatic payment of the full bill.
We have covered a number of topics in this chapter, but the unifying
message is simple. For mortgages, school loans, and credit cards, life is far
more complicated than it needs to be, and people can be exploited. Often
it’s best to ask people to take care of themselves, but when people borrow,
standard human frailties can lead to serious hardship and even disaster.
Here as elsewhere, government should respect freedom of choice; but
with a few improvements in choice architecture, people would be far less
likely to choose badly.
144 MONEY
*Similarly, credit card limits, which are nominally in place to limit spending, may
serve as high anchors that actually encourage spending.
145
In the 2000 U.S. presidential campaign, George W. Bush called
for a partial privatization of the Social Security system. According to his
plan, a portion of the payroll tax would be designated for individual savings accounts. At the same time that this issue was being debated in the
United States, Sweden was launching a system similar to President Bush’s
proposal. Although Bush’s plan did not get much attention in the early
years of his administration, it resurfaced prominently in 2005. Though it
failed in Congress, some version of this proposal is likely to be considered
again before long, either in the United States or in other countries. Important lessons can be learned from the Swedish experience—lessons,
above all, about the limitations of any simple celebration of freedom of
choice.
We shall see that Sweden’s officials did quite well on some aspects of
their choice architecture but made at least one important error that led its
citizens to choose portfolios that are not nearly as good as they could have
been. A better set of nudges would have helped. By understanding why, we
can learn a lot about Social Security reform, and about much else besides.
Design of the Swedish Privatization Plan
If we were to pick a single phrase to characterize the design of the
Swedish plan, it would be “pro-choice.” In fact, the plan is a good example of the Just Maximize Choices strategy. Give people as many options as
9
PRIVATIZING SOCIAL SECURITY:
SMORGASBORD STYLE
possible, and then let them do whatever they want. At almost every stage,
the designers opted for a laissez-faire approach. In particular, the plan had
the following key features:
1. Participants were allowed to form their own portfolios by selecting up
to five funds from an approved list.
2. One fund was chosen (with some care) to be a default fund for anyone
who, for whatever reason, did not make an active choice.
3. Participants were encouraged (via a massive advertising campaign) to
choose their own portfolios, rather than rely on the default fund.
4. Any fund meeting certain fiduciary standards was allowed to enter the
system. Thus market entry determined the mix of funds from which
participants could choose. As a result of this process, there were initially
456 (!) available funds. (As of August 14, 2007, there were 783 funds in
the plan, but since inception there have been more than 1,000, so some
funds come and go rather rapidly.)
5. Information about the funds, including fees, past performance, and
risk, was provided in book form to all participants.
6. Funds (except for the default fund) were permitted to advertise to attract money.
If Swedish citizens were all Econs, none of these design choices would
be controversial. The combination of free entry, unfettered competition,
and lots of choices seems great. But if Swedes are Humans, then maximizing choice may not lead to the best possible outcome. As it turns out, it
didn’t.
The Default Fund
There are two sets of issues relating to the default fund. What
should be in the portfolio? And what status should it get from the government—that is, does the government want to encourage people to take up
the fund, to discourage them from doing so, or what? Here are a few of the
many possible options that might have been selected:
A. Participants are given no choice: the default fund is the only fund offered.
146 MONEY
B. A default is picked, but its selection is discouraged.
C. A default is picked, and its selection is encouraged.
D. A default is picked, and its selection is neither encouraged nor discouraged.
E. Required choosing. There is no default option; participants must
make an active choice or they forfeit their contributions.
Which of these would a good choice architect select? That depends on
the architect’s level of confidence in the ability and willingness of the participants to do a good job of choosing portfolios on their own. Option A is
hardly a nudge. It eliminates all choice, and so is inconsistent with libertarian paternalism. We don’t recommend it.
At the other extreme, plan designers could avoid picking a default fund
entirely by forcing everyone to choose a portfolio for themselves—option
E, required choosing. If the designers are confident that people will do a
good job picking portfolios for themselves, then they might consider this
policy. Although required choosing can be attractive in some domains, we
think that the Swedish government was right not to insist on it in this particular setting.1 Inevitably some participants will fail to respond to attempts to reach them (maybe because they are out of the country, ill, preoccupied, unable to communicate, or just clueless). Cutting such people
off from all benefits is harsh, and probably unacceptable as a matter of politics or principle. In any case it isn’t easy to choose among more than four
hundred funds; why should a government force its citizens to make that
choice, when some would prefer to rely on what experts say, as captured in
the default?
So we are left with the three middle options. If we are to have a default
option as well as other choices, should we encourage or discourage its use?
Clearly there is a wide variety of choices along the continuum from
strongly discouraging the default to strongly encouraging it. What’s best?
Option D has obvious appeal: simply designate a default but neither encourage nor discourage it. But it is an illusion to think that this alternative
fully solves the problem. What does it mean to be neutral? If we notify people that the plan was designed by experts and has low fees (both true about
the actual default chosen), does this constitute encouragement? We don’t
mean to split hairs here. Our point is simply that designers will have to
PRIVATIZING SOCIAL SECURITY 147
make a decision about how to describe the default plan, and these decisions will help determine the market share this plan attracts.
In analyzing the middle options, we need to know something about the
competence of those who design the default and the competence and diversity of those who might depart from it. If the designers are terrific, if the
default fits all, and if the choosers are likely to blunder, then it might make
sense to encourage people to select the default. If the designers are essentially guessing, if the choosers know a lot, and if the situations of different
choosers are relevantly different, then it might be best to err on the size of
official neutrality.
In any case, the Swedish plan adopted a version of plan B. Participants
were actively encouraged to choose their own portfolios via an extensive
advertising campaign. This advertising effort seems to have had the desired effect, because two-thirds of participants did select portfolios on
their own. Participants were more likely to make active choices if they had
more money at stake, and, holding money constant, women and younger
participants were more likely to make active choices. (We have a theory
about why women were more likely to make active choices: we think that
women were less likely to lose the enrollment forms, and more likely to remember to mail them in. We admit to having no data to support this theory, and plead guilty to the possibility that we are being overly influenced—via the availability bias—by the fact that our significant others are
considerably more organized than we are.)
Of course, one-third of the participants ended up with the default fund,
and that figure might well seem high. It was, in fact, the largest market
share of any fund. But the government campaigned hard to get people to
choose actively, and a sense of the impact of the campaign can be inferred
by what has occurred in the years since the plan was started. The upshot is
that as the government’s campaign diminished in intensity, people became
significantly less likely to choose their own portfolios.
Here are a few details. When the plan was launched in the spring of
2000, every participant who was then in the workforce was asked to
choose a portfolio. In the years following the launch, new workers (mostly
young people) have joined the plan, and they were also asked to choose a
portfolio. But soon after the initial enrollment period, the government
148 MONEY
ended its advertising campaign encouraging participants to make an active
choice. Moreover, private funds themselves greatly reduced their advertising aimed at attracting investments. Probably as a result of both these factors, the proportion of people choosing their own portfolios fell as well.
For those workers joining the plan in April 2006 (the most recent enrollment period for which we have data), only 8 percent selected their own
portfolios!* Because these new participants are primarily young workers,
this percentage is most usefully compared with that of workers who were
under age twenty-two when the plan was launched in 2000. That group
chose their own portfolios 56.7 percent of the time in 2000, much more
than now.
Did Active Choosers Make Good Choices?
Were people made better off by choosing their own portfolios? Of
course, we do not have any way of knowing the preferences of individual
participants, and we also do not know what assets they may be holding
outside the social security system, so it is not possible for us to say anything
definitive about how good a job they did picking a portfolio. But we can
nonetheless learn a lot by comparing the portfolios people actively constructed with the default fund on dimensions that sensible investors should
value—such as fees, risk, and performance. To make a long story short, the
active choosers didn’t do so great.
The default fund appears to have been chosen with some care (see Table
9.1). The asset allocation is 65 percent foreign (that is, non-Swedish)
stocks, 17 percent Swedish stocks, 10 percent fixed-income securities
(bonds), 4 percent hedge funds, and 4 percent private equity. Across all asset classes, 60 percent of the funds are managed passively, meaning that the
portfolio managers are simply buying an index of stocks and not trying to
beat the market. One good thing about index funds is that they are cheap.
The fees they charge investors are much lower than those charged by funds
that try to beat the market. These low fees for the index funds helped keep
PRIVATIZING SOCIAL SECURITY 149
*In fact, the percentage of active choosers has declined steadily, from 17.6 percent in
2001, the first year after the launch.
the costs in the default fund very low, 0.17 percent. (This means that for
every $100 invested, the investor is charged 17 cents per year.) Overall,
most experts would consider this fund to be very well designed.
To see how the active choosers did as a group, we can examine the comparable figures for the aggregate portfolio selected initially by the participants who made their own choices. There are three points of interest in
this comparison. First, although the allocation to stocks in the default plan
was quite high, it is even higher in the portfolios actively chosen: 96.2 percent. People probably chose to invest so heavily in stocks because the stock
market had been booming for the previous few years.
150 MONEY
Table 9.1
Comparison of the default fund and the mean actively chosen portfolio
Mean actively
Asset allocation Default chosen portfolio
(%) (%)
Equities 82 96.2
Sweden 17 48.2
Americas 35 23.1
Europe 20 18.2
Asia 10 6.7
Fixed-income securities (bonds) 10 3.8
Hedge funds 4 0
Private equity 4 0
Indexed 60 4.1
Fee 0.17 0.77
Returns for the first three years 29.9 39.6
Returns through July 2007 21.5 5.1
Note: The table compares the default fund and the mean actively chosen portfolio. The data on
the asset allocations are from data on funds’ holdings from Morningstar. Fee is the yearly expense
ratio as a percentage of fund assets. Ex post performance is returns over a three-year postreform
period (October 31, 2000 through October 31, 2003). Funds’ market shares following the portfolio choices in year 2000 have been used as weights to calculate the characteristics of the mean actively chosen portfolio.
Second, the active choosers elected to invest nearly half their money
(48.2 percent) in the stocks of Swedish companies. This reflects the wellknown tendency of investors to buy stocks from their home country,
something that economists refer to as the home bias.2 Of course you
might think that investing at home makes sense: buy what you know! But
when it comes to investing, buying what you think you know does not
necessarily make sense. As we saw in the previous chapter, employees buying shares of the company for which they work show no ability to make
profitable trading decisions.
Consider the following fact. Sweden accounts for approximately 1 percent of the world economy. A rational investor in the United States or
Japan would invest about 1 percent of his assets in Swedish stocks. Can it
make sense for Swedish investors to invest 48 times more? No.*
Third, only 4.1 percent of the funds in the selected portfolios were indexed. As a result, the fees paid by the active choosers are much higher:
0.77 percent compared with the 0.17 percent charged by the default fund.
This means that if two people invest ten thousand dollars each, the active
investor is paying $60 a year more in fees than the one who took the default portfolio. Over time, these fees add up.† In summary, those who selected portfolios for themselves selected a higher equity exposure, more
active management, much more local concentration, and higher fees.
At the time these investments were made, it would have been hard to
make the case that the actively selected portfolios were better investments
than the default fund. And although a few years of returns do not prove
anything, not only was the default fund designed better at the start, but it
has also performed better. Because of the decline in the market that followed the launch of this plan, investors did not do well for the first three
years (from October 31, 2000, through October 31, 2003), but those who
invested in the default fund suffered less. The default fund lost 29.9 percent in those three years, while the average portfolio of those participants
who picked their funds actively lost 39.6 percent.
PRIVATIZING SOCIAL SECURITY 151
*If you are worried about currency risk, that is a problem easily solved, and in fact
the default fund did solve it, by hedging in the currency markets (essentially a type of
insurance).
†The fees we report here are the ones that were advertised. Later some funds offered
discounts, so fees fell.
In subsequent years the default fund has continued to outperform people’s choices. Through July 2007 the default fund is up 21.5 percent while
the average actively managed portfolio is up only 5.1 percent. Indeed, the
performance of the default fund has been so good over this period that the
fund rating service Morningstar has given the fund its highest, five-star,
rating (compared with other “global” funds) since 2003. In contrast, the
aggregate portfolio selected by participants would probably have received
three stars if it were considered a single global fund.
An interesting feature of the Swedish experience is that the launch of
the fund occurred just as the bull market in stocks (and the bubble in technology stocks) was ending. Although it is impossible to specify the precise
effect of this accident of timing on people’s choices (or even on the decision to launch the privatization program), the data provide some strong
hints. We have already noted that the actively chosen portfolios had more
than 96 percent of their money in stocks. Had the launch occurred just
two years later, the proportion invested in stocks would almost certainly
have been lower. As we saw in Chapter 8, individual investors tend to be
trend followers, rather than good forecasters, in their asset-allocation decisions.
In a period in which technology stocks had been soaring, it is not surprising that the investments were also tilted toward those stocks. To give
one illustrative example, the fund that attracted the largest market share
(aside from the default fund) was Robur Aktiefond Contura, which received 4.2 percent of the investment pool. (This is a huge market share:
keep in mind that there were 456 funds, and that one-third of the money
went into the default fund.) Robur Aktiefond Contura invested primarily
in technology and health care stocks in Sweden and elsewhere. Over the
five-year period leading up to the choice, its value increased by 534.2 percent, the highest of all the funds in the pool. In the first three years after the
launch of the program, it lost 69.5 percent of its value. In the subsequent
three years, the returns have continued to be volatile.
In retrospect, it cannot be a surprise that a fund like Robur Aktiefond
Contura would get a large percentage of the investments in the pool.
Think about what people are being asked to do. They receive a book that
lists the returns for 456 funds over various time horizons, along with a lot
of other important information, involving fees and risk, that they are not
152 MONEY
well equipped to understand. The one thing they are probably sure of is
that high returns are good. Of course, these are past returns, but investors
have traditionally had trouble distinguishing between past returns and
forecasts of future returns. We can’t help but imagine the following conversation going on over a kitchen table somewhere in Sweden between Mr.
and Ms. Svenson.
mr. svenson: Wilma, what are you doing with that book?
ms. svenson: I am looking for the best fund to invest in, Björn.
And I think I just found it. Robur Aktiefond Contura is the winner. It is up 534 percent over the past five years. If we invest in this
we can retire in Majorca!
mr. svenson: Yeah, whatever. Can you pass the gravlax?
Because the investments of participants are influenced by recent returns,
the timing of the launch of the program can have a strong impact on people’s choices. This effect can be long lasting, because only a tiny percentage of participants decide to alter their portfolios. Status quo bias is alive
and well in Sweden. In the first three years, the percentage of participants
who made at least one change to their portfolios during the year was only
1.7, 2.7, and 3.1, respectively. This is similar to the inertia found in U.S.
401(k) plans.3 The combination of undue attention paid to recent returns
and inertia in managing the portfolio thereafter means that the accident of
timing (when the new system is launched) can end up having a profound
impact on the investments that participants choose.
In fact, “accident of timing” may be the wrong phrase, because a privatization plan seems most likely to be approved after a long bull market.
Witness the decline in political support for the Bush plan after the bear
market of 2001 and 2002. Political judgments, no less than investment decisions, can be driven by recent, available events.4
Advertising
The decision to allow funds to advertise does not seem particularly
controversial. In fact, given the rest of the design of this system, it is hard
to imagine an advertising ban. If funds are free to enter this market, then
presumably they should be free to court customers by all legal means,
PRIVATIZING SOCIAL SECURITY 153
which naturally include (truthful) advertising. Still, it is interesting to see
what effect advertising had on this market. What should we expect?
Consider two extreme “dream” scenarios. In the first dream, one being dreamt by a free-market economist with a peaceful smile on his face,
advertisers are helping to educate consumers by explaining the benefits
of lower costs, diversification, and long-run investing, as well as the folly
of extrapolating recent returns into the future. In this dream, ads help
each consumer discover her own ideal location on what economists
call the “efficient frontier”—the place all rational investors want to find.
In other words, the advertising helps consumers make better, smarter
choices.
The other dream is more of a nightmare, one that keeps psychologists
and behavioral economists tossing and turning. In this dream, advertisers
are encouraging participants to think big, not to settle for average (by indexing), and to think of investing as a way to get rich. In this nightmare,
ads almost never mention fees. But they do talk a lot about past performance, even though there is essentially no evidence that past performance
predicts future performance. (People who like to bet on sporting events
will recognize a parallel in advertisements telling people about “locks” on
upcoming games, and about the amazing and nearly infallible forecasts of,
say, the past three weeks.)
How did reality turn out? A typical ad showed the actor Harrison Ford,
of Star Wars and Indiana Jones fame, plugging a Swedish fund company’s
products. According to the ad copy, “Harrison Ford can help you pick a
better pension.” We are not sure which of Ford’s roles qualifies him to
provide this advice. (We do know that Indiana Jones is depicted as a professor from the University of Chicago, but, alas, he was not in the business
school or the economics department.)
More generally, a study by Henrik Cronqvist (2007) shows that the ads
resembled the nightmare more than the happy dream. Only a small proportion of fund advertising can be construed as directly informative about
characteristics relevant for rational investors, such as funds’ fees. And while
funds heavily advertised past returns (for those funds that had high returns), such ads in no way forecasted good future returns. Nevertheless,
fund advertising did strongly affect investors’ portfolio choices. It steered
people into portfolios with lower expected returns (because of higher fees)
154 MONEY
and higher risk (through a higher exposure to equities, more active management, more “hot” sectors, and more home bias).
Doing (Badly) Without Nudges
The tale of privatization of social security in Sweden is highly revealing. The basic problem is that government planners did not choose the
best choice architecture. Instead, they relied on a kind of dogmatic commitment to the Just Maximize Choices mantra, in a way that led to predictable effects from availability bias and inertia. Better choice architecture
could have helped.
We have emphasized that on the key issue of choosing a default, the designers of the Swedish plan did an excellent job. The default plan was selected with care, and we think many people outside of Sweden would invest in the fund if it were available. This outcome belies the notion that
governments are inherently incapable of doing anything right. The worst
feature of the Swedish plan was the decision to encourage participants to
choose their own portfolios. In complex situations, the government might
actually be able to provide some useful hints. Recall a main lesson from
Part 1: if the underlying decision is difficult and unfamiliar, and if people do
not get prompt feedback when they err, then it’s legitimate, even good, to
nudge a bit.
In this context, it would have been better for the government to say
something like this: “We have designed a program that has a comprehensive set of funds for you to choose from. If you do not feel comfortable
making this decision on your own, you could consult with an expert, or
you could choose the default fund that has been designed by experts for
people like you.” The Swedish government seems to agree with us: it no
longer actively encourages people to choose their own portfolios.
If the United States ever adopts similar partial privatization of its own
Social Security system, whether as an alternative to or substitute for the
traditional system, many lessons can usefully be learned from the Swedish
experience. Because the U.S. economy is more than thirty times as big as
Sweden’s, a similar free-entry system would probably generate thousands
of funds. This might make those who believe in the Just Maximize Choices
mantra happy, but most Humans would find choosing from such a long
PRIVATIZING SOCIAL SECURITY 155
list bewildering. A better plan would start by following Sweden’s lead of
choosing a good default plan, containing mostly index funds with managers selected by competitive bidding. Participants would then be guided
through a simplified choice process (preferably on the Web). The process
would start with a yes-or-no question: “Do you want the default fund?”
For those who said yes, their task would be done (though of course they
could always change their minds at a later date). Those who rejected the
default would be offered a small set of blended funds, perhaps based on the
age of the participant (again privately managed with competitive fees).
Only participants who rejected all of these funds would get to the comprehensive list. Evidence from the private sector suggests that few participants
would make use of the big list, but their right to do so would be fully protected.
An examination of the Swedish experience offers a much broader lesson.
The more choices you give people, the more help you need to provide. As
we will see, that is a lesson that the people who designed the Medicare Prescription Drug program did not learn.
156 MONEY
PART
III
HEALTH
Libertarian paternalists see countless opportunities for improving
people’s health. Social influences could obviously be enlisted: if most people think that most people are starting to avoid unhealthy foods, or to exercise, more people will avoid unhealthy foods and will exercise. As we
have seen, people who know obese people are more likely to be obese
themselves; weight loss can be contagious too. Framing matters: people
are more likely to engage in self-examinations for skin and breast cancer if
they are told not about the reduced risk if they do so but about the increased risk if they fail to do so. Doctors are crucial choice architects, and
with an understanding of how Humans think, they could do far more to
improve people’s health and thus to lengthen their lives.
We focus on three particular problems here. The first raises complex
questions of choice architecture. The federal government now has an extremely expensive prescription drug plan for seniors, one that operates on
the familiar premise that government should give people a lot of choices
and then get out of the way. As we will see, the resulting program has major problems, in part because many people are unable to understand it.
The second problem is the simplest. The United States could save a lot of
lives if more people donated their organs. How can donation rates be in-
creased? You will not be stunned to hear that a switch in the default rule
would have a major impact. The third problem includes human health but
extends even more broadly: What can be done to protect the environment? Nudges are not enough, but an understanding of their power offers
some fresh answers to that question.
158 HEALTH
10
PRESCRIPTION DRUGS: PART D
FOR DAUNTING
159
Prescription drug coverage was a hot topic during the 2000 presidential campaign. As a solution, Democrat Al Gore proposed a classic government mandate. Gore wanted to add prescription drug coverage to
Medicare in a single plan, assemble a panel of medical experts to work out
the specifics, and offer the package to all seniors. Republican George W.
Bush, in contrast, offered what might be considered a good example of the
theme of his campaign: compassionate conservatism. Indeed, Bush tried
to combine compassionate conservatism with a major role for free markets
and the private sector. He offered seniors an expensive new entitlement
program—but one that featured a wide variety of drug plans devised by
private health care companies and that let consumers choose whether to
join and which plan to pick.
Three years later, President Bush’s version passed on a narrow vote in
Congress. The largest overhaul in Medicare’s history, Bush’s plan created
a half-trillion-dollar federal subsidy for prescription drug coverage called
Part D. “The reason why we felt it was necessary to provide choices is because we want the system to meet the needs of the consumer,” President
Bush told a clubhouse of Florida seniors in 2006, with the plan’s rollout
under way. “The more choices you have, the more likely it is you’ll be able
to find a program that suits your specific needs. In other words, one-sizefits-all is not a consumer-friendly program. And I believe in consumers, I
believe in trusting people.”1
President Bush’s trust in American seniors left them with a great deal of
decision-making responsibility. But this was no laissez-faire system. The
national government imposed a lot of structure. Before consumers could
even begin to choose, the government set minimum coverage requirements and approved all private plans. This system of constrained free
choice might seem like a nice example of libertarian paternalism in action.
And in fact, we think that on some dimensions Bush was on the right
track. As a health care delivery system, Part D met its planners’ expectations reasonably well. As a piece of choice architecture, however, it suffered from a cumbersome design that impeded good decision making. It
offered a menu with lots of choices, which is fine, but it had four major
defects:
• It gave participants little guidance to help them make the best selections from that menu.
• Its default option for most seniors was nonenrollment.
• It chose a default at random (!) for six million people who were automatically enrolled, and it actively resisted efforts to match people and
plans based on their prescription drug histories.
• It failed to serve the most vulnerable population, specifically the poor
and the poorly educated.
Do not misunderstand. Part D has done a lot of good. Contrary to the
charges of the critics, it has not been an unmitigated disaster. But there is
plenty of room for better choice architecture.
Our discussion in this chapter will be fairly detailed; it is difficult to understand the program, and what is wrong with it, without a sense of the
key choices and where they went sour. But if the four defects are kept in
mind, the forest will not be lost for the trees.
Design of Medicare Part D
Before Part D, about half of all American seniors—approximately
twenty-one million—had some form of prescription drug coverage
through private plans or a government source such as the Department of
Veterans Affairs. Government officials had high hopes of covering the rest
through Part D. The working principle was to provide seniors with as
160 HEALTH
many federally approved choices as possible. The result was a policy with
six key features.
1. For most people, Part D is a voluntary plan; you benefit only if you enroll in it. An exception applies to 6.2 million low-income seniors and
disabled people who were previously covered by Medicaid (the government medical insurance program for the poor). These two groups are
supposed to choose from a subset of the private plans, namely the
cheapest and most basic plans meeting certain benchmarks (in 2007
states had between five and twenty basic plans). Anyone who does not
make an active choice is enrolled randomly into one of these plans.
2. The initial enrollment period ran from November 2005 to May 2006,
with open enrollment periods at the end of every subsequent year. Seniors who do not enroll when they become eligible, and who lack a
comparable private plan, face a penalty on their premiums for every
month they delay.
3. Seniors can enroll in a stand-alone prescription drug plan or a joint
Medicare–Prescription Drug plan.*
4. Plans differ across states, from 45 stand-alone plans in Alaska to 66 in
West Virginia and Pennsylvania. Most states offer between 50 and 60
stand-alone plans and between 15 and 142 joint plans. The total number
of available plans has increased since the law was enacted.
5. During the initial enrollment period, the government, with help from
such groups as aarp (formerly known as the American Association for
Retired People, in 1999 the organization shortened its name to remove
the “R” word from its title), sponsored a $400 million public awareness campaign encouraging people to choose a plan. Medicare officials,
including the secretary of health and human services, traveled the
country in a giant blue bus to promote the program. Companies also
PRESCRIPTION DRUGS 161
*Stand-alone plans are commonly purchased by individuals who already have separate health insurance coverage through traditional Medicare, a pension plan, or a private employer. Joint plans are for those enrolled in Medicare Advantage, a special series
of privately operated plans (health-maintenance organizations [hmos], preferredprovider organizations [ppos], and private fee-for-service plans) that tend to provide
more benefits than the traditional Medicare program but limit doctor choice.
sent out their own advertisements. Currently, seniors are advised to
“rely on advice from people you know or trust,” “choose a plan you are
already familiar with,” or use a customized guide called the Medicare
Prescription Drug Plan Finder on the Medicare Web site.2
6. Coverage starts with the first prescription a patient needs, but then
stops for a while after the patient has spent a certain amount of money,
only to start up again when another spending plateau is reached. In the
popular press, this coverage gap is usually described as the “doughnut
hole.” Because we know well that discussion of the details of Plan D
can cause dangerous headaches even without any mention of the
doughnut hole, we will consign any further discussion of this issue to
the endnotes. Let’s just say that no economist would ever recommend
an insurance policy with this feature.
If the people eligible for these plans were Econs, none of these design
features would be a problem. “If consumers are up to this task, then their
choices will ensure that the plans, and insurers, that succeed in the market
are ones that meet their needs,” writes the Nobel Prize winner Daniel
McFadden, a University of California–Berkeley economist who has studied Part D extensively. “However, if many are confused or confounded,
the market will not get the signals it needs to work satisfactorily.”3 With so
many complex plans to choose from, it should not be a huge surprise that
seniors have had a difficult time sending the right signals.
Confusion Awaiting Clarity
As the six-month window for enrolling in Part D was closing,
people were struggling to sign up. Consider the experience of seniors in
McAllen, Texas. Known as the City of Palms, McAllen is a town of one
hundred thousand people, located in the Rio Grande valley near the
Mexican border. A manufacturing hub for multinational corporations,
McAllen is the kind of poor town—about one-fifth of residents sixtyfive and older live in poverty—that was intended to benefit hugely from
Part D.
To obtain those benefits, however, eligible residents first needed to
wade through forty-seven prescription drug plans. “Intellectually, the pro162 HEALTH
gram is a good idea,” said Dr. E. Linda Villarreal, a former president of the
Hidalgo-Starr County Medical Society. “But there’s been total chaos and
confusion among most of my patients, who do not understand the system
and how to work it.” Ramiro Barrera, a co-owner of Richard’s Pharmacy
in Mission, said: “The new Medicare program is a full-time job. We are
swamped with requests for help from beneficiaries.”4
The experience in McAllen was hardly unique. Seniors everywhere were
confused. So were their doctors and pharmacists. Together they overwhelmed Medicare hot lines set up to help people figure out the best plan
for them. Critiquing Medicare Part D’s complexity became so common
that Saturday Night Live spoofed the maze of detail in a phony public service commercial. The commercial promised a simple and easy plan to techsavvy seniors who had succeeded in completely mastering their computers,
iPods, and satellite televisions.
President Bush sympathized with the frustration but said that the program would ultimately be worth the pain. “I knew that when we . . . laid
out the idea of giving seniors choices, it would create a little confusion for
some,” he told the Florida seniors. “I mean, after all, up to now there
hadn’t been . . . many choices in the system, and all of a sudden, [for] a senior who feels pretty good about things [here comes] old George W . . .
and all of a sudden forty-six choices pop up.”
How were seniors expected to handle all those choices? President Bush
urged them to have patience and to turn to private institutions for assistance. “We encouraged all kinds of people to help,” he said. “Aarp is helping; naacp is helping; sons and daughters are helping; faith-based programs are helping people sort through the programs to design a program
that meets their needs. I readily concede some seniors have said, there are
so many choices, I don’t think I want to participate. My advice is there is
plenty of help for you.”
The impulse here was commendable, but you have now read enough to
know that offering people forty-six choices and telling them to ask for help
is likely to be about as good as no help at all. And in Medicare Part D’s
case, many of the groups meant to assist seniors were confused themselves.
The confusion spread to medical professionals, who agreed with their patients that the number of plans in the current program bewildered everyone. Others, such as aarp, decided to go into the business of offering inPRESCRIPTION DRUGS 163
surance plans as well as giving advice about which plan to select, a pretty
obvious conflict of interest.
In the end, getting seniors into a plan turned out not to be the biggest
problem. Organizations were ultimately successful at signing up large
numbers of beneficiaries.5 As of January 2007 fewer than 10 percent of all
Medicare beneficiaries—about four million—had no drug coverage, either through Part D or an equivalent private plan.6 One-quarter of those
in a plan were probably healthy enough that they did not need to enroll
immediately.7 Their participation, however, was crucial to Part D’s survival, because they helped to subsidize sick seniors. To federal health
officials, the high enrollment was a sign of undeniable success. To this extent, freedom of choice has worked—a nice point for those who reject, as
we do, the idea that one size fits all.
Overall, seniors seem happy about the program (as they should be, because it provides them with an enormous government subsidy!). Since the
passage of the new Medicare law, disapproval of the program has steadily
fallen while approval has risen, in an apparent tribute to rapid learning over
time. In November 2005, just as seniors were getting their first taste of
forty-plus plans, half of eighteen hundred seniors surveyed had an unfavorable view of the program, compared with 28 percent who viewed it favorably. By November 2006 the unfavorable rating had fallen to 34 percent, while the favorable rating had risen to 42 percent. When asked about
their own personal experiences, three out of four held a “very” or “somewhat” positive view of Part D.8
Seeing these patterns, a vigorous defender of Part D could claim that, as
with any new program, participants underwent a sometimes painful educational process, but, on the whole, were ultimately satisfied with the plan
they chose. Overwhelming majorities thought they had made good
choices, though for reasons to be developed shortly, we doubt that many
had much basis for that evaluation.
Of course it is true that because of learning, once-complicated choices
become easier. But we think that there has been a lot less learning about
Part D than a casual look suggests. For starters, the high enrollment rates
were achieved in part because approximately two-thirds of seniors were
easily or automatically enrolled through one of a variety of routes: employer or union plans; Medicaid, Veterans Affairs, or federal employee cov164 HEALTH
erage; or the special, more comprehensive Medicare program known as
Medicare Advantage. Advertising campaigns and media coverage certainly
boosted awareness, but no one should read the statistics and conclude that
thirty-eight million seniors filled out a Part D application because the government asked them to do so.
In addition, many people are still not enrolled in the program, even
though it is clear that they should be. Four million uncovered Americans is
a large number, and studies suggest that this group is probably dominated
by poorly educated people living just above the poverty line (and thus not
eligible for Medicaid). In addition, one-quarter of the 13.2 million seniors
eligible for a low-income subsidy—again, most of them poorly educated
and living alone—did not take advantage of it. Because coverage for this
last group is practically free when the subsidy is added in, 25 percent nonenrollment is disturbingly high.
Even when people do elect to enroll, an abundance of choice can overwhelm them. Since the new Medicare law passed, seniors have consistently
told interviewers that they find Part D dumbfounding. After a year of experience in the program, only about one in ten said it was working well and
needed “no real changes.” In November 2006, once again with a year of
experience and knowledge, 73 percent of seniors said Part D was “too
complicated,” and 60 percent agreed with a statement that an unnamed
party, most likely the government, should “select a handful of plans . . . so
seniors have an easier time choosing.” The consensus of the medical community was even stronger. More than 90 percent of both doctors and
pharmacists, who had been bombarded with patient questions throughout the enrollment period, agreed that the program was too complicated.
These responses suggest that overall consumer satisfaction could be a lot
higher with a better design. Complexity is the most glaring problem. But
it is not the only one. In fact, two other pieces of Part D’s choice architecture are just as puzzling.
Random Default Plans for the Most Vulnerable
In the Introduction, we discussed the options faced by cafeteria
supervisor Carolyn; one of those options was to display food items at random. We said that this option could be considered fair-minded and princiPRESCRIPTION DRUGS 165
pled, but that it would lead to unhealthy diets at some schools. The option
didn’t strike us as desirable because it unfairly penalized some students by
inducing them to consume a diet consisting entirely of pizza, egg rolls,
and ice cream.
Still, this is the option the government adopted for six million of its
poorest and sickest citizens. It automatically assigned each person who did
not pick a plan on her own to a randomly chosen default plan with premiums at or below certain benchmarks for her specific region. As a result of
plan restructuring, another 1.1 million people were eligible for random assignment in 2007. One state, Maine, shrewdly resisted this system in favor
of an “intelligent assignment” process for forty-five thousand people. We
will return to shrewd Maine shortly; for now, we focus on the other fortynine states.
The poorest and sickest enrollees are those people eligible for both
Medicare and Medicaid (and so are called the “dual eligibles”). These people are disproportionately African-American, Latino, and female. Dual eligibles are more likely to have diabetes and strokes than other Medicare
beneficiaries, and they use, on average, ten or more prescription drugs.9
They include the most severely disabled Americans, physically and cognitively handicapped men and women of all ages, and elderly patients suffering from dementia and requiring full-time care. The government has not
said exactly how many dual eligibles actively chose a plan, but the evidence
we have suggests that very few did. Dual eligibles are able to switch plans
at any time—but if few are actively choosing plans, we suspect that few are
taking advantage of the flexible switching option.
Random assignment can cause random harm to unlucky people placed
in plans that don’t fit their needs. For the drugs that dual eligibles take
most often, and that are in categories covered by the law, plans varied considerably in their coverage, from as low as 76 percent to as high as 100 percent. This means that some dual eligibles were defaulted into a plan that
did not cover the drugs they use most. They could switch, of course, but
being Human, most stayed with the plan that had been lovingly picked at
random for them. And given the patchy drug access, it is not surprising
that random plan defaults impaired people’s health. In a recent survey of
dual eligibles, 10 percent reported improved medication access, while more
166 HEALTH
than 22 percent said they had stopped taking medications temporarily or
permanently because of problems in managing the new plan.10
The government’s official reason for rejecting intelligent assignment in
favor of random assignment is that people’s prescription needs change.
Someone’s past use is no guarantee of her future use. In the health care
community, there has been a lot of head scratching about this argument.
Especially for the elderly, who are often on several long-term medications,
last year’s drug use is often an excellent predictor of next year’s, and certainly it is a better predictor than picking a plan out of a hat.
It seems somewhere between callous and irresponsible to assign plans
without even looking at people’s specific needs. Random assignment is
also inconsistent with the market-based philosophy of the plan. In markets, better products get a higher share, and most free-market economists
consider this a good feature. We do not think that every automobile manufacturer should get the same market share any more than we think that
families should pick their cars at random. Why should we want randomness for insurance plans?
How costly were the mistakes and misallocations caused by this random
assignment? One way to examine this issue is to see how many people
chose to switch plans after the first year. (Every November there is an
open enrollment period when participants can switch plans.) Unfortunately, we don’t know as much as we’d like to about plan switching because the government has not been very forthcoming about releasing the
data. It did announce that during the open enrollment period for 2007,
about 2.4 million—10 percent of Part D enrollees—changed plans. But of
those who changed, 1.1 million were low-income beneficiaries, most of
whom were moved unilaterally by the government so that they would not
have to pay increased premiums. That means that excluding dual eligibles,
only 6 percent actively changed plans. (We suspect that the percentage of
active switchers is even lower if we include the entire population of enrollees.)11
There are two possible interpretations of these low switching rates. One
interpretation, favored by defenders of the plan, and the one that would be
correct if we were studying a population of Econs, is that all is going well—
the wide variety of plans is handling diverse health conditions, and seniors
PRESCRIPTION DRUGS 167
have chosen the best plan for their needs. The second interpretation, more
plausible if the participants are Humans, is that inertia and the status quo
bias are keeping people from switching. How can we tell which interpretation is right? One way is by comparing the participants who actively chose
their own plan with those who had a plan picked at random for them. For
the latter group there can be no presumption that the plan they started
with is the best one. And the fact that we find low switching rates for both
groups suggests that the second interpretation is right. Most participants
seem to find that the burden of switching—the time and energy it takes to
decide on the best plan—is just not worth the effort.
Is it worth that effort? The answer depends on how varied the plans are,
and how costs differ depending on the set of drugs people use. Consider a
comparative study of the prices of drugs covered by basic plans (the kind
poor beneficiaries would be defaulted into) in three regions of the country.
The study reported savings between $5 and $50 per drug per month when
individuals are assigned to the lowest-cost, best-fitting basic drug plan.12
More data comparing entire plans, as opposed to individual drugs, should
be available soon, and we think they will confirm results that other academic teams are beginning to find. Kling’s team has estimated almost a
$700 annual difference between a randomly chosen plan and the lowestcost plan. Choosing the right plan, rather than a random plan, has the potential to save both seniors and the government a lot of money. If hundreds of dollars are at stake for every person, many seniors would find it
worthwhile to spend at least an hour or two sorting out the best plan
(much as they would in choosing a new washing machine or putter).
Not User-Friendly
Unfortunately, spending an hour or two is not going to get the
job done. The chief tool people have to help choose a plan is the Medicare
Web site. “This will help people make competent decisions,” said the head
of federal Medicare offices. “They’ll have an unprecedented array of tools
that will help them find a drug plan.”13 But there is an obvious problem
with relying heavily on a Web site. Most seniors do not yet use the Internet, let alone the Medicare Web site, and those who do are rarely Web168 HEALTH
savvy (though this will change over time). Most seniors get their information about Part D passively from mailings by insurers, the government,
and groups like aarp. Those mailings are highly unlikely to contain personalized information. So the Web site is the best source for help. To
whom does the job of navigating the site fall? To seniors’ adult children, of
course.
An economist friend of ours, Katie Merrell, is one adult who does research on health coverage and took it upon herself to choose plans for both
her elderly parents. She found that the task took hours, even for an expert
like herself. Katie allowed us to see how painful choosing a plan would be
by kindly providing a list of the drugs her mother takes. Thaler logged
onto the Medicare Part D Web site and tried his luck. What a nightmare!
Just to give one example, the site does not have a spell checker. If you type
“Zanax” instead of “Xanax,” you don’t get any help (unlike at Google, for
example). This is a problem because drug names resemble strings of random letters, so typing errors are to be expected. Getting all the dosages
right is also tricky. You need to know both the size of the pill (for example,
25 mg) and how frequently it is taken. The Web site assumes you take a
generic drug, if it is available, and gives you the option of keeping the
premium brand drug. Many people, however, take generics while calling
them by their brand name, which requires paying close attention to every
drug selection. Once a user manages to get all the data entered, the Web
site offers three plan suggestions, with annual cost estimates. (Technophobic seniors can call 1-800-medicare and have a customer service representative give them the three plan suggestions and prices, but no explanation is offered for how these plans have been chosen.)14
Eventually (with help from Katie that bordered on psychotherapy),
Thaler managed to get some answers, though not the same ones that Katie
got. Still, because Thaler is nearing Medicare age himself, he thought perhaps someone younger would have an easier time of it. So we asked one of
our graduate student research assistants to give it a try. Being younger and
more patient helped, but he got yet another set of answers. We then pulled
out all the stops and put the youngest and smartest member of our team
on the job, our student intern (and Teen Jeopardy whiz), who was headed
for a top college that fall. Even she, who normally finds everything easy,
PRESCRIPTION DRUGS 169
was befuddled at times in this process. And no two of us, though armed
with the same data, ended up with the same cost estimates or the same recommended plans.*
At first, we were stumped. But it turns out that even four Econs couldn’t
have mimicked each other perfectly. We all got different estimates because
prescription drug plans are constantly updating their drug prices. There is
no guarantee that the cheapest plan for your mother today would be the
cheapest plan for your mother tomorrow. In fact, Consumers Union has
tracked price differences in five large states and found continuous monthly
changes. Sometimes these fluctuations are only a few dollars; sometimes
more. Nearly 40 percent of the 225 plans underwent changes of more than
5 percent, which can add up to several hundred dollars per year.15 Frequent
price changes are one more hurdle for Humans to jump, and in light of our
experience, they can be a rude awakening to those who don’t know about
them.
Did Choosers Make Good Choices? Not Always
What is it like to pick a prescription drug plan? How hard is it to
choose the right one? The short answer is: really hard. For the sake of argument, ignore decisions about whether to enroll in Medicare Part D, or
whether to enroll in a stand-alone drug plan or a Medicare Advantage
plan. Assume that you, like most enrollees, are picking a stand-alone plan.
You’ll need to compare plans along fifteen major dimensions. (If you
doubt that this is confusing, read the endnote, which offers some details,
but we suggest taking two aspirin before you start reading.)16
True, the Medicare Web site tries to help seniors sort plans across some
of these dimensions. But we have already pointed to the pain and suffering
that accompany using this Web site, and even if you arrive at the concluding page and see the three cheapest plans available, you shouldn’t breathe
easy. You will not be able to tell from the Web site whether prior authorization will be hard to obtain in your situation, or what the quantity limit
170 HEALTH
*Katie tells us we shouldn’t feel bad. She used the exercise of picking a plan for her
mom in a talk she gave to a group of experts in the field and found a similar range of different answers and comparable frustration.
on a particular drug will be. This information is probably available only after you sign up for a plan and attempt to fill the particular prescription.
Figuring out whether seniors are making good choices would require information about their health characteristics and their plans. Given the obvious concerns about privacy, the government has not released these data. But
it apparently believes, and even says, that seniors are making good choices.
We are not so sure. A good choice is one that meets a person’s specific needs.
In an experiment, the economist Daniel McFadden and his team have attempted to evaluate how good (or bad) seniors’ choices turn out to be.
McFadden’s team members gave seniors a break. They tried to give
them a reasonable chance of making a good choice. Seniors didn’t have to
worry about pharmacy networks and prior authorization. They were offered only four options. To make the choice even easier, a person’s particular economic circumstances were also thrown out the window. The four
plans offered were worth the same amount of money. They differed only in
the level of protection provided as drug bills rose.
Even in this simplified environment, a high percentage of seniors made
poor choices among the four available plans, because they failed to connect their choices to their actual health, prescription use, and attitude toward risk. In all, nearly two-thirds of enrollees failed to choose the plan
that minimized their out-of-pocket costs.17
Possible Nudges
As libertarian paternalists, we applaud the Bush administration for
insisting on freedom of choice in Part D. We leave it to others to debate
the pros and cons of a single-payer plan. But like any plan with lots of options, better choice architecture can help a lot.
Intelligent Assignment
Random default plan assignment is a terrible idea. If a poor person
is assigned to a bad plan and does not switch, her drug bills may rise, or she
may decide to stop taking an expensive drug, as some already have. This
may save the government money in the short run, but it will be costly in
the long run, especially for diseases such as diabetes, for which a failure to
keep on the drug regime can lead to numerous complications. The govPRESCRIPTION DRUGS 171
ernment also pays more if it assigns someone to one plan if a different plan
covers all that person’s drugs and costs 15 percent less.
The most obvious response is to end random assignment in favor of
what has been dubbed intelligent assignment. As we have noted, Maine is
the only state that uses an intelligent assignment system for placing its dual
eligibles in a prescription drug plan.18 Random assignment “resulted in a
poor fit for many dual eligible beneficiaries in Maine,” according to a Government Accountability Office report. Under random assignment, only
one-third of the beneficiaries were placed in plans that covered all of their
recently used drugs, and one-quarter were in plans that covered fewer than
60 percent of those drugs.19
In Maine, to match each eligible participant with a plan, the ten plans
meeting state coverage benchmarks were evaluated according to three
months of historical data on prescription use. Participants in plans covering fewer than 80 percent of their required drugs were switched automatically (with participants retaining the option to cancel the reassignment).
Another set of participants received letters informing them that better
matches existed, and were advised to contact state officials for more information. Intelligent assignment switched more than ten thousand people—
22 percent of all the dual eligibles—and produced dramatic results. Although incomplete data and technology malfunctions created some initial
problems, Maine officials now say that every dual eligible is in a plan that
covers 90–100 percent of her required drugs.20
Maine was not the only state interested in intelligent assignment. In
2005 two leading pharmaceutical groups, the National Association of
Chain Drug Stores and the National Community Pharmacists Association,
collaborated with a Tampa, Florida, health care information technology
company, Informed Decisions, to develop software that matched people
with plans. The consortium’s presentations to federal government officials
were met politely but coolly. (Perhaps its advocates should have called it
“intelligent design.”) As a result of skepticism from Washington and legal
challenges from insurers, intelligent assignment is used to place dual eligibles only in Maine. Other states should clearly be encouraged, not discouraged, from experimenting with similar methods, and more important,
the law mandating random assignment should be revised.
172 HEALTH
RECAP
Seniors could be helped a lot if our recap system were applied to
Medicare. Recap would also make using the Medicare Web site a snap
(well, relatively speaking).
Here’s how recap would work. Once a year, just before the enrollment
period opens, companies would send seniors a complete, itemized list of all
the drugs used over the previous year and all the fees incurred. Insurers
would also have to provide an electronic summary of their complete pricing schedule to anyone who wanted it. The information would be made
available online, so it could be imported into both the Medicare Web site
and comparison pricing programs that could now easily be offered by third
parties. The purpose of the information would be to nudge seniors away
from a status quo bias and encourage comparison shopping by making
prescription drug costs as salient as possible. Because the costs of delay are
high for large majorities of seniors, similar nudges could be used on nonenrollees. Price disclosures could be sent to those seniors who delayed enrollment, with a clear delineation of the recent and current premiums for a
sample of popular plans. One goal would be to highlight for seniors how
much money a delay costs them.
We believe that in this domain, as elsewhere, the requirement that
providers offer a recap report would lead private sector firms to offer services allowing participants to input their data to help choose the best plan.
In fact, a Massachusetts company called Experion Systems has already developed an online Prescription Drug Plan Assistant tool that is a more
user-friendly version of the government Web site’s form. An early version
of the tool asks people questions that guide better decision making. Experion has also joined with the pharmacy chain CVS/pharmacy to make it
possible to import usage information of the sort that would be found on a
recap report. If a recap rule were in place, then Experion could import
the relevant usage data no matter where people obtain their prescriptions.
The recap information could also be used to improve intelligent assignment programs. One research team has produced some preliminary
evidence that a recap-style nudge has promise. In a study of Wisconsin
beneficiaries, the team estimated that if people moved from their current
plan to the lowest-cost plan that continued to meet their drug needs, they
PRESCRIPTION DRUGS 173
could save, on average, about five hundred dollars a year.21 To see whether
people would take advantage of these savings with a slight nudge, the researchers mailed a personal letter to a random sample of study participants
who had agreed to share their personal drug histories. The letter explained
the costs in their current plan, the cheapest comparable plan, and the savings they could realize by switching plans. Another random sample of participants received generic Part D brochures instead. Both mailings contained the Internet address of the Medicare plan finder Web site and
information about how to use it. The personal letters appear to have
nudged more people to pick lower-cost plans. The overall switch rate
among seniors receiving letters was 27 percent—10 percentage points
higher than among those receiving brochures. More than three times as
many letter receivers as brochure receivers picked the cheapest plan—the
one mentioned in the letter (although the overall percentages were still in
single digits). These results are consistent with other studies showing that
people are making errors in their choices among plans, and that simple,
clear information can reduce those errors.
The lesson of Part D is similar to that of the Swedish social security reform. In complex situations, the Just Maximize Choices mantra is not
enough to create good policy. The more choices there are, and the more
complex the situation, the more important it is to have enlightened choice
architecture. To produce a user-friendly design, the architect needs to understand how to help Humans. Software and building engineers live by a
time-honored slogan: keep it simple. And if a building has to be complicated to be functional, then it is best to offer plenty of signs to help people
navigate. Choice architects need to incorporate these lessons.
174 HEALTH
175
The first successful organ transplant took place in 1954, when a
man offered his twin brother a kidney. The first transplant of a kidney from
a deceased donor occurred eight years later. As they say, the rest is history.
Since 1988 more than 360,000 organs have been transplanted, with
nearly 80 percent of the organs coming from deceased donors. Unfortunately, the demand for organs greatly exceeds the supply. As of January
2006 more than 90,000 Americans were on waiting lists for organs, mostly
for kidneys. Many (possibly as many as 60 percent) will die while on the
list, and the waiting list is growing at a rate of 12 percent per year.* Although this topic is both interesting and important enough to deserve an
entire book, we will comment only briefly on the potential effect of better
11
HOW TO INCREASE ORGAN DONATIONS
*Of course, economists have a simple solution to this problem, which is to permit a
market in organs. Although the idea has obvious merit, it is also spectacularly unpopular for reasons that are not well understood. We will not address the issue here. For a
good summary of the argument in favor of introducing markets see Becker and Elias
(2007). Although explicit markets appear to be politically infeasible now, a type of
barter exchange does seem to be acceptable. Suppose that each of us needs a kidney,
and each has a sibling who is willing to donate but does not have the same blood type
(which is essential). If Sunstein’s sister was a match for Thaler and Thaler’s brother was
a match for Sunstein, then a trade could be set up. Much work is now being done in an
effort to orchestrate such matches, using techniques similar to those we discuss below
involving school choice. A question to ponder: Why is it socially acceptable for Sunstein
and Thaler to arrange this trade but unacceptable for Sunstein to offer to buy Thaler’s
brother a new car in exchange for his kidney?
choice architecture in increasing available organs.1 We think that some
simple interventions would save thousands of lives every year—and do so
while imposing essentially no new burdens on taxpayers.
The primary sources of organs are patients who have been declared
“brain dead,” meaning that they have suffered an irreversible loss of all
brain function but are being maintained temporarily on ventilators. In the
United States, roughly twelve thousand to fifteen thousand potential
donors are in this category each year, but fewer than half become donors.
Because each donor can be used for as many as three organs, getting another thousand donors could save as many as three thousand lives. The
major obstacle to increasing donations is the need to get the consent of
surviving family members. It turns out that good default rules can increase
available organs and thus save lives. Let us consider the possible approaches.
Explicit Consent
In the United States, most states use what is called an explicit consent rule, meaning that people have to take some concrete steps to demonstrate that they want to be donors. It is clear that many people who are
willing to donate organs fail to take the necessary steps. A study of Iowa
residents by Sheldon Kurtz and Michael Saks confirms the point. “Ninetyseven percent of respondents indicated their general support for transplantation. Sizeable majorities said they were interested in donating their own
organs and those of their children (should the tragic circumstances arise
that would make them eligible).” However, people’s stated willingness to
become donors did not translate into the necessary action. “Of those who
expressed their support, only 43% had the box checked on their driver’s license. Of those who stated they personally wanted to donate their organs,
only 64% had marked their driver’s license and only 36% had signed an organ donor card.”2
In short, the concrete steps necessary to register as an organ donor appear to deter otherwise willing donors from registering. Many Americans
who fail to register as organ donors at least profess to be willing donors. As
in other domains, the default rule has a big impact, and inertia exerts a
strong influence. Changes in choice architecture would help to ensure that
176 HEALTH
more organs are available, in a way that would not only save lives but also
fit with the wishes of the potential donors.
Routine Removal
The most aggressive approach, which is more than a default rule,
is called routine removal. Under this regime, the state owns the rights to
body parts of people who are dead or in certain hopeless conditions, and it
can remove their organs without asking anyone’s permission. Though it
may sound grotesque, routine removal is not impossible to defend. In theory, it would save lives, and it would do so without intruding on anyone
who has any prospect for life.
Although this approach is not used comprehensively by any state, many
states do use the rule for corneas (which can be transplanted to give some
blind patients sight). In some states, medical examiners performing autopsies
are permitted to remove corneas without asking anyone’s permission. Where
this rule has been used, the supply of corneal transplants has increased dramatically. In Georgia, for example, routine removal increased the number of
corneal transplants from twenty-five in 1978 to more than one thousand in
1984.3 The widespread practice of routine removal of kidneys would undoubtedly prevent thousands of premature deaths, but many people would
object to a law that allows government to take parts of people’s bodies when
they have not agreed, in advance, to the taking. Such an approach violates a
generally accepted principle, which is that within broad limits, individuals
should be able to decide what is to be done with and to their bodies.
Presumed Consent
A policy that can pass libertarian muster by our standards is called
presumed consent. Presumed consent preserves freedom of choice, but it
is different from explicit consent because it shifts the default rule. Under
this policy, all citizens would be presumed to be consenting donors, but
they would have the opportunity to register their unwillingness to donate,
and they could do so easily. We want to underline the word easily, because
the harder it is to register your unwillingness to participate, the less libertarian the policy becomes. Recall that libertarian paternalists want to imINCREASING ORGAN DONATIONS 177
pose low costs, and if possible no costs, on those who go their own way. Although presumed consent is, in a sense, the opposite of explicit consent,
there is a key similarity: under both regimes, those who don’t hold the default preference will have to register in order to opt out.
Let’s suppose, for the sake of argument, that both explicit consent and
presumed consent could be implemented with “one-click” technology.
Specifically, imagine that the state could successfully contact every citizen
(and the parents of minors) by email, asking them to register. In a world of
Econs, the two policies would produce identical outcomes. Because the
costs of registering are trivial, everyone would click the preferred choice.
But even in a one-click world, the default will matter if the population is
made up of Humans.
Of course that is how the population is composed, and thanks to an important experiment conduced by Eric Johnson and Dan Goldstein (2003),
we know something about how much the choice of the default matters in
this domain. Using an online survey, the researchers asked people, in different ways, whether they would be willing to be donors. In the explicit
consent condition, participants were told that they had just moved to a
new state where the default was not to be an organ donor, and they were
given the option of confirming or changing that status. In the presumed
consent version, the wording was identical but the default was to be a
donor. In the third, neutral, condition, there was no mention of a default—they just had to choose. Under all three conditions, the response
was entered literally with one click.
As you will now expect, the default mattered—a lot. When participants
had to opt in to being an organ donor, only 42 percent did so. But when
they had to opt out, 82 percent agreed to be donors. Surprisingly, almost
as many people (79 percent) agreed to be donors in the neutral condition.
Although nearly all states in the United States use a version of explicit
consent, many countries in Europe have adopted presumed consent laws
(though the cost of opting out varies, and always involves more than a
click). Johnson and Goldstein have analyzed the effects of such laws by
comparing countries with presumed consent to those with explicit consent. The effect on consent rates is enormous. To get a sense of the power
of the default rule, consider the difference in consent rates between two
similar countries, Austria and Germany. In Germany, which uses an opt-in
178 HEALTH
system, only 12 percent of the citizens gave their consent, whereas in Austria, nearly everyone (99 percent) did.
Some Complexities
So far, presumed consent looks awfully good, but we must stress
that this approach is hardly a panacea. A program that successfully gets organs from deceased donors to needy transplant recipients requires a complete infrastructure. Currently, Spain is the world’s leader in developing
that infrastructure, achieving a donation rate of nearly thirty-five donors
per million people, compared with a bit more than twenty donors per million in the United States. But the U.S. donation rate is higher than in many
presumed consent countries because of the superiority of the American
medical system in quickly matching consenting donors with recipients, delivering the organs, and performing successful transplants. The default
consent rule, therefore, is not the only thing that matters. Still, careful statistical analyses by the economists Abadie and Gay (2004) find that, holding everything else constant, switching from explicit consent to presumed
consent increases the donation rate in a country by roughly 16 percent.
Johnson and Goldstein obtain a slightly smaller but similar effect. Whatever the precise figure, it is clear that the switch would save thousands of
lives every year.
Determining the exact effect of changing the default rule is difficult because countries vary widely in how they implement the law. France is technically a presumed consent country, but physicians routinely ask the family
members of a donor for their permission, and they usually follow the family’s wishes. This policy blurs the distinction between presumed consent
and explicit consent.
Still, the default rule does matter. In the United States, if there is no explicit donor card for survivors to see, families reject requests for donations
about half the time. The rejection rate is much lower in countries with presumed consent rules, even though there is typically no record of the
donor’s wishes. In Spain the rate is about 20 percent, and in France it is
about 30 percent.4 As one report put it: “The next of kin can be approached quite differently when the decedent’s silence is presumed to indicate a decision to donate rather than when it is presumed to indicate a
INCREASING ORGAN DONATIONS 179
decision not to donate. A system of presumed consent allows organ procurement organizations and hospital staff to approach the family as the
family of a ‘donor’ rather than as the family of a ‘nondonor.’ This shift may
make it easier for the family to accept organ donation.”5
Mandated Choice
Although presumed consent is an extremely effective way to increase the supply of organs available for transplant, it may not be an easy sell
politically. Some will object to the idea of “presuming” anything when it
comes to such a sensitive matter. We are not sure that these objections are
convincing, but this is surely a domain in which forced choosing, or what is
referred to in this domain as mandated choice, has considerable appeal.
Mandated choice could be implemented through a simple addition to
the driver’s license registration scheme used in many states. With mandated choice, renewal of your driver’s license would be accompanied by a
requirement that you check a box stating your organ donation preferences. Your application would not be accepted unless you had checked one
of the boxes. The options might include “yes, willing to donate” and “no,
unwilling to donate.” An interesting question is whether states should include an “unsure” or “don’t know” option. If there is such an option, the
regime is not really mandated choice. It is more like “mandated choice if
you feel like it”! And experimental evidence in other domains suggests that
if you give people the option to procrastinate about making a decision,
they will often take that option.
We suspect that mandated choice would produce fewer registered
donors than a presumed consent policy, but it could still lead to a
significant increase in donations and hence save a lot of lives. And it seems
likely that family members would be more willing to respect the expressed
wishes of a donor who actively said “yes” compared with a donor who simply failed to say “no.”
Norms
We think that states should give considerable thought to presumed consent or mandated choice, on the grounds that either approach
180 HEALTH
would be likely to save many lives while also preserving freedom. But even
under a system of explicit consent, states could take a few simple steps that
would do a great deal of good. Illinois’s plan, for example, shows a terrific
intuitive understanding of choice architecture.
The key part of the plan is the Illinois First Person Consent registry, enacted in 2006, which has helped to attract more than 2.3 million registered
donors. A central feature of the registry is that after a person gives her consent, additional consent from the donor’s family is not required at the relevant time. This is important because in Illinois signing the back of your
INCREASING ORGAN DONATIONS 181
11.1
Online promotion of organ donation in Illinois (Used with permission of Donate Life
Illinois)
driver’s license is not full legal consent—family members can still overrule
your wishes. Under the old Illinois system, the only way to get around this
was to send in a signed donor card, or to submit a document signed by two
witnesses. The new First Person Consent registry greatly reduces the cost
of consent by allowing people to register online.
We think that the Web page (see Figure 11.1) used to attract donors is an
excellent example of good nudging. First, the state stresses the importance
of the overall problem (ninety-seven thousand people on the waiting list)
and then brings the problem home, literally (forty-seven hundred in Illinois). Second, social norms are directly brought into play, in a way that
builds on the power of social influences: “87 percent of adults in Illinois
feel that registering as an organ donor is the right thing to do” and “60
percent of adults in Illinois are registered.” Recall that people like to do
what most people think it is right to do; recall too that people like to do
what most people actually do. The state is enlisting existing norms in the
direction of lifesaving choices—and doing so without coercing anyone.
Third, there are links to MySpace, where people can signal that they are
concerned citizens. In the context of environmental protection, people often do what they believe is right in part because they know that other people will actually see them doing what they believe is right. The same might
well be true for organ donations.
The Web site is almost certainly saving a significant number of lives, and
it offers a model for other states to follow.
182 HEALTH
183
In recent decades, governments all over the world have been taking aggressive steps to protect the environment. Concerned about air and
water pollution, the spread of pesticides and toxic chemicals, and the loss
of endangered species, governments have expended significant resources,
hoping to improve human health and to reduce the harmful effects of human activities on wildlife and on pristine areas. Many of their actions have
done a lot of good; efforts to reduce air pollution have prevented hundreds of thousands of premature deaths and millions of illnesses as well.
But many regulatory efforts have been costly and wasteful, and some of
them have aggravated the very problems that they were meant to solve.
Aggressive controls of new sources of air pollution, for example, can extend the life of old, dirty sources, and thus increase air pollution, at least in
the short run.
In recent years, the focus has shifted to international environmental
problems, including depletion of the ozone layer, now controlled by a
range of international agreements, which have succeeded in banning
ozone-depleting chemicals. But above all, public attention is focused on
climate change, which is not yet subject to effective international controls,
and on which we shall have a few things to say here. Might nudges and improved choice architecture reduce greenhouse gases? Definitely; we will
sketch some promising possibilities.
Most of the time, governments seeking to protect the environment and
12
SAVING THE PLANET
to control the harmful health effects of pollution have gone well beyond a
nudge, and their steps have not been libertarian. In this domain, freedom
of choice has hardly been the guiding principle. Typically regulators have
chosen some kind of command-and-control regulation, by which they reject free choices and markets entirely and allow people little flexibility in
promoting environmental goals. Command-and-control regulation is
sometimes embodied in technological mandates, through which government effectively requires the environmentally friendly technologies that it
prefers; catalytic converters for cars are one example.
More often, government officials do not specify technologies, but require across-the-board reductions in emissions. They might say, for example, that in ten years, all new cars must emit 90 percent less carbon monoxide, on average, than they now do, or that power plants must not exceed
certain levels of sulfur dioxide emissions. Or the government might establish a national ambient air quality standard, insisting that every state must
meet it by a specified date, and must not allow pollution levels to exceed
the standard (except, perhaps, rarely).
In the United States, national emissions limitations imposed on major
pollution sources have been the rule, not the exception. Such limitations
have sometimes been effective; the air is much cleaner than it was in 1970.
Philosophically, however, such limitations look uncomfortably similar to
Soviet-style five-year plans, in which bureaucrats in Washington announce
that millions of people have to change their conduct in the next five years.
Sometimes people do change, but sometimes they don’t, or the costs of
making the changes turn out to be unexpectedly high, and then the bureaucrats have to go back to work. If the goal is to protect the environment, might good choice architecture be able to help?
We are all too aware that for environmental problems, gentle nudges
may appear ridiculously inadequate—a bit like an effort to capture a lion
with a mousetrap. When the air or the water is too dirty, the standard
analysis says that it is because polluters impose “externalities” (that is,
harms) on those who breathe or drink. Even libertarians tend to agree that
when externalities are present, markets alone do not achieve the best outcomes. Those who pollute (meaning all of us) do not pay the full costs that
we impose on the environment, and those of us who are harmed by pollution (again, all of us) usually lack any feasible way to negotiate with pol184 HEALTH
luters to get them to clean up their acts. People who celebrate freedom of
choice are well aware that when “transaction costs” (the technical term for
the costs of entering into voluntary agreements) are high, there may be no
way to avoid some kind of government action. When people are not in a
position to make voluntary agreements, most libertarians tend to agree
that government might have to intervene.
It helps to think about the environment as the outcome of a global
choice architecture system in which decisions are made by all kinds of actors, from consumers to large companies to governments. Markets are a
big part of this system, and for all their virtues, they face two problems that
contribute to environmental problems. First, incentives are not properly
aligned. If you engage in environmentally costly behavior next year,
through your consumption choices, you will probably pay nothing for the
environmental harms that you inflict. This is what is often called a “tragedy
of the commons.” Each dairy farmer has an incentive to add more cows to
his herd, because he obtains the benefits of the additional cows while suffering only a fraction of the costs; but collectively the cows ruin the pasture. Dairy farmers need to find some way to avert this tragedy, perhaps
through an agreement to limit the number of cows that each will be permitted to add. Similar problems plague the fishing industry.
The second problem that contributes to excessive pollution is that people do not get feedback on the environmental consequences of their actions. If your use of energy produces air pollution, you are unlikely to
know or appreciate that fact, certainly not on a continuing basis. Even if
you know about the connection, it is probably not salient to your behavior.
Those who turn up the air conditioning and leave it on for a few weeks are
unlikely to think, moment-by-moment or even day-by-day, about all of
the personal and social costs. We thus begin our discussion of environmental problems with these two aspects of choice architecture: incentives
and feedback.
Better Incentives
When incentives are badly aligned, it is appropriate for government to try to fix the problem by realigning them. In the environmental
area, two broad approaches have been proposed. The first is to impose
SAVING THE PLANET 185
taxes or penalties on those who pollute. In the domain of climate change,
a tax on greenhouse gas emissions, favored by many environmentalists
(and economists too), is a simple example. The second approach is called a
cap-and-trade system. In such systems those who pollute are given (or
sold) “rights” to pollute in certain amounts (the “cap”) and these rights
are then traded in a market. Most specialists believe that such incentivebased systems as these should usually displace command-and-control regulation. We agree. Incentive-based approaches are more efficient and
more effective, and they also increase freedom of choice.1
We freely acknowledge that such proposals are not original, but the fact
that we agree with most economists on this issue does not seem a sufficient
reason to reject the idea! (We offer some behavioral elaborations below
that incorporate the fact that agents in the economy are Humans.) Furthermore, we think that this basic approach is compatible with libertarian
paternalism because people can avoid paying the tax by not creating pollution. Especially when compared with command-and-control systems,
economic incentives have a strong libertarian element. Liberty is much
greater when people are told, “You can continue your behavior, so long as
you pay for the social harm that it does” than when they are told, “You
must act exactly as the government says.” Companies much prefer capand-trade systems to rigid government commands, because such systems
allow more freedom and impose lower costs. If a polluter wants to increase
its level of activity, and hence its level of pollution, it isn’t entirely blocked.
It can purchase a permit via the free market. Assuming that greenhouse
gases are to be regulated, American companies have been arguing for a
cap-and-trade system for exactly this reason. And if the problem of climate
change is to be seriously addressed, the ultimate strategy will be based on
incentives, not on command-and-control.
Much of the time, the best approach to pollution problems is to impose
a tax on the harmful behavior and to let market forces determine the response to the increased cost. The price of the harm-producing good will
go up, and consumption will decline. Of course none of us likes taxes. But
raising the tax on gasoline, for example, would eventually induce drivers to
buy more fuel-efficient cars, drive less, or both. As a result, emissions of
carbon dioxide, the leading contributor to global warming, would decline.
And if gas taxes were increased, automobile manufacturers would have
186 HEALTH
plenty of incentives to develop new technologies to meet the demand for
more fuel-efficient cars.
The alternative cap-and-trade system is similar in spirit and approach. In
the pollution context, people who reduce their pollution below a specified
level are allowed to trade their “emissions rights” for cash. In one stroke,
such a system creates market-based disincentives to pollute and marketbased incentives for pollution control. Such a system also rewards rather
than punishes technological innovation in pollution control, and does so
with the aid of private markets. Trading systems, based on market principles, are proving increasingly popular at the international level. The Kyoto
Protocol, designed to control greenhouse gases, contains a trading mechanism specifically designed to decrease the costs of emissions reductions.2
These incentive-based systems have not always gained political traction—in part, we think, because they make the costs of cleaning up the environment transparent. Announcing a new fuel efficiency standard sounds
misleadingly “free,” whereas imposing a carbon tax sounds expensive,
even if it is actually a cheaper way of achieving the same goal. One solution
to the political problem of getting such bills passed may be to use some
mental accounting. For example, the revenues from a carbon tax might be
paired with a cut in personal tax rates, the funding of Social Security and
Medicare, or the provision of universal health insurance. Similarly, the
“rights” to pollute in a cap-and-trade system can be auctioned off, and the
revenues used in the same way. This linking of costs and benefits might
help the pill go down more easily.
In the United States, the most dramatic program of economic incentives can be found in the 1990 amendments to the Clean Air Act. Pushed
by President George H. W. Bush, and broadly supported by both Republicans and Democrats, the act relies on an emissions trading system for the
control of acid deposition (“acid rain”). Indeed, much of corporate America was willing to accept the system on the ground that the ability to trade
emissions rights would drive down the cost. With this program, Congress
made a specific decision about the “ceiling” or “cap”—the aggregate emissions level—for pollutants that produced acid deposition. Polluters are explicitly permitted to trade their allowances. Because pollution reduction
can be turned into cash, strong incentives are created for environmentally
beneficial behavior.
SAVING THE PLANET 187
The acid deposition program has turned out to be a terrific success.3
Compliance with the program has been nearly perfect. Considerable trading has occurred; an effective market in permits has developed, just as anticipated. Since enactment of the program, the price of transporting coal
has been reduced dramatically because of deregulation, and the program
has proved able to handle this surprise, with permits trading for far less
than anticipated. As compared with a command-and-control system, the
trading mechanism is estimated to have saved $357 million annually in its
first five years. For its first twenty years, the mechanism was projected to
save $2.28 billion annually, for an overall savings in excess of $20 billion.
Indeed, it is fair to say that the acid deposition program ranks among the
most spectacular success stories in all of American environmental regulation. Because the costs of the program have been so much lower than anticipated, the cost-benefit ratio seems especially good, with compliance
costs of $870 million compared to estimates of annual benefits ranging
from $12 billion to $78 billion—including reductions of nearly 10,000
premature deaths and more than 14,500 cases of chronic bronchitis.
It is reasonable to hope that for greenhouse gases, Congress will either
rely on carbon taxes or (more likely) build on the acid deposition model,
using economic incentives to reduce aggregate emissions. Indeed, much
attention has already been given to the possibility of creating worldwide
markets in greenhouse gas emissions rights, with a cap on global emissions.4 A central advantage of such a system is that it would ensure that reductions would be made by those who could do so most cheaply—and
that those with a real need for emissions licenses would pay people, perhaps especially in poor nations, who would prefer to have the money.
Feedback and Information
Although we think that the most important step in dealing with
environmental problems is getting the prices (that is, incentives) right, we
realize that such an approach is politically difficult. When voters are complaining about the high price of gasoline, it can be hard for politicians to
unite on a solution that raises this price. A key reason is that the costs of
pollution are hidden, while the price at the pump is quite salient. So we
suggest that along with getting the prices right (or while we are waiting for
188 HEALTH
the political courage to set the prices right), we should take other nudgelike steps that can help to reduce the problem in politically more palatable
ways.
An important and highly libertarian step would be an improvement in
the process of feedback to consumers through better information and disclosure. Such strategies can improve the operation of markets and government alike, and are also far less expensive, and less intrusive, than the command-and-control approaches that national legislatures have so often
favored. To be sure, many environmentalists fear that disclosure by itself
will accomplish too little. They might be right. But sometimes information is a surprisingly strong motivator.
Mandatory messages about risks from cigarette smoking, first established in 1965 and modified in 1969 and 1984, are perhaps the most familiar example of a disclosure policy. The Food and Drug Administration has
long maintained a policy of requiring risk labels for pharmaceutical products. The Environmental Protection Agency (epa) has done the same for
pesticides and asbestos. Before the phaseout of ozone-depleting chemicals, warning labels were required for products containing such chemicals.
Congress requires warnings on products with saccharin. Under President
Reagan, no fan of regulation, the Occupational Safety and Health Administration issued a Hazard Communication Standard (hcs). All employers
must adopt a hazard-communication program—including individual
training—and inform workers of the relevant risks. The hcs has made
workplaces significantly safer, and, aside from mandating disclosure, it has
done so without requiring employers to alter their behavior in the slightest.
Some disclosure statutes are designed to trigger political rather than
market mechanisms; here the goal is not to give consumers feedback on
their decisions but to inform voters and their representatives. The most famous of these statutes is the National Environmental Policy Act, enacted
in 1972. The principal goal of the act is to require government to compile
and disclose environmentally related information before it goes forward
with any projects having a major effect on the environment. The purpose
of disclosure is to activate political safeguards, coming from the government’s own judgments once the environmental effects are made clear, or
from external pressure on the part of citizens who have learned about
SAVING THE PLANET 189
those effects. The idea behind the statute is that if the public gets riled up,
the government will be pressured to give some weight to environmental
effects, but if the public reacts to the disclosures with a yawn, the government would be justified in doing nothing.
One significant success story for disclosure requirements is the Emergency Planning and Community Right to Know Act, a law enacted by
Congress in 1986 in the aftermath of the Chernobyl nuclear reactor disaster in Ukraine.5 Originally a modest and uncontroversial measure, the law
was not designed to produce environmental benefits by itself. It was essentially a bookkeeping measure, intended to give the Environmental Protection Agency a sense of what was out there. The statute turned out to do a
lot more. In fact, the requirement of disclosure, captured in the Toxic Release Inventory, may be the most unambiguous success story in all of environmental law.
To create the Toxic Release Inventory, firms and individuals must report
to the national government the quantities of potentially hazardous chemicals that have been stored or released into the environment. The information is readily available on the epa Web site to anyone who wants it. More
than twenty-three thousand facilities now disclose detailed information on
more than 650 chemicals, covering more than 4.34 billion pounds of onsite and off-site disposal or other releases. Users of hazardous chemicals
must also report to their local fire departments about the locations, types,
and quantities of stored chemicals. And they must disclose information
about potential adverse health consequences.
The surprising fact is that without mandating any behavioral change,
this law has had massive beneficial effects, spurring large reductions in
toxic releases throughout the United States.6 This unanticipated consequence suggested that all by themselves, disclosure requirements might be
able to produce significant emissions reductions.* (We will shortly see
190 HEALTH
*A paper by Ginger Zhe Jin and Phillip Leslie (2003) documents a similar finding for
restaurants. In 1998 Los Angeles County introduced hygiene quality grade cards that
had to be displayed in restaurant windows. The researchers found that the grade cards
caused the restaurant health inspection scores to improve, consumers’ sensitivity to hygiene in restaurants to increase, and hospitalizations for food-borne illnesses to decrease.
how the success of the Toxic Release Inventory might be repeated in the
context of climate change.)
Why, exactly, has the Toxic Release Inventory had such beneficial effects? A major reason is that environmentally concerned groups, and the
media in general, tend to target the worst offenders, producing a kind of
“environmental blacklist.”7 This is a nice example of a social nudge. No
company likes to be on that list. The bad publicity can result in all sorts of
harms, including lower stock prices.8 Companies that end up on the list
are likely to take steps to reduce their emissions. Even better, companies
are motivated to ensure that they do not end up on the list. The result is a
kind of competition, in which companies enact more and better measures
to avoid appearing to be significant contributors to toxic pollution. If
companies are able to reduce emissions at low cost, they will do so, simply
in order to avoid the bad publicity and the resulting harms.
With this example in mind, we can now sketch an initial, low-cost nudge
for the problem of climate change. The government should create a
Greenhouse Gas Inventory (ggi), requiring disclosure by the most significant emitters. The ggi would permit people to see the various sources of
greenhouse gases in the United States and to track changes over time. Seeing that list, states and localities could respond by considering legislative
measures. In all likelihood, interested groups, including members of the
media, would draw attention to the largest emitters. Because the climate
change problem is salient, a Greenhouse Gas Inventory might well be expected to have the same beneficial effect as the Toxic Release Inventory.
To be sure, an inventory of this kind might not produce massive changes
on its own. But such a nudge would not be costly, and it would almost certainly help.
Other information-disclosure efforts could be adopted. Since 1975
Congress has required new automobiles to meet fuel economy standards.
A helpful disclosure mandate, accompanying the economy standards requirement, was designed to promote competition by requiring companies
to post in large print the expected fuel economy buyers can expect from
each car (see Figure 12.1).
But what, exactly, do mileage numbers mean? For most of us, the answer
isn’t at all obvious. The goal of promoting competition could be accomplished far more effectively by translating the mileage data into dollars,
SAVING THE PLANET 191
solving the mapping problem. In fact, the epa is revising its fuel economy
label to highlight the estimated annual fuel cost, as well as the methodology for determining that number. The new label also shows graphically
where the specific vehicle falls within the range of mpg ratings for vehicles
in its class (see Figure 12.2). The regulations go into effect starting with
model year 2008 vehicles.
We applaud the new stickers, though we think they might be even more
powerful if they computed a five-year figure for money spent on fuel.
Imagine the sticker on a Hummer! Even better would be to post these
numbers on the back of the car for other drivers to see. One reason that the
Toyota Prius has been so successful compared with other hybrid cars is that
the Prius is sold only as a hybrid (unlike, say, a Camry, which is sold in both
conventional and hybrid versions). People who want to signal their green
credentials are much happier in a Prius than a hybrid Camry because no
one will know that the Camry is a hybrid unless she carefully examines
some labeling on the car.
Similar disclosure requirements might produce greener housing. Incentive problems permeate the home-building industry because the costs of
making a home more energy efficient are borne up front by the builder,
192 HEALTH
12.1
Fuel economy sticker (Environmental Protection Agency)
whereas the costs of heating and cooling are later paid by the owners. It is
not surprising to find that homes do not have the kinds of energy-saving
devices that are common when the building is designed by the ultimate
user (and utility bill payer). Take one example from the hotel business.
Many hotel rooms, especially in Europe, require that the plastic room key
used to enter the room be inserted in a slot by the door in order to turn on
the lights. When the key is removed, the lights and air conditioning go off,
but the power to the clock radio does not. Why are rooms designed this
way? Because the hotel company has to pay the utility bills, and management knows that customers have no incentive to turn out the lights. Hotel
companies are willing to pay the extra cost up front to include this feature.
But why don’t we have a similar switch in our homes? Wouldn’t you like
to be able to flip one switch as you walk out the door that would turn off
all the lights but not all the clocks?
Ambitious Environmental Nudges
Here is a more ambitious idea. What if a way could be found to ensure that people see, each day, how much energy they have used? Clive
SAVING THE PLANET 193
12.2
Revised fuel economy sticker (Environmental Protection Agency)
Thompson (2007) has explored the efforts of Southern California Edison
to encourage its consumers to conserve energy—and its creative, nudgelike solution. Past attempts to notify people of their energy use with emails
or text messages did no good, but what worked was to give people an Ambient Orb, a little ball that glows red when a customer is using lots of energy but green when energy use is modest. In a period of weeks, users of
the Orb reduced their use of energy, in peak periods, by 40 percent. That
flashing red ball really gets people’s attention and makes them want to use
less energy. (We think it might work even better if, when energy use went
over a certain threshold, the device made annoying sounds, such as cuts
from ABBA’s Gold: Greatest Hits.)
As Thompson notes, the underlying problem is that energy is invisible,
so people do not know when they are using a lot of it. The genius of the
Orb is that it makes energy use visible. Emphasizing the importance of
feedback, Thompson suggests that we might find a way to see our daily
consumption of energy—and perhaps even to put the relevant figures in a
public place, such as a Facebook page. In fact, a design firm, DIY Kyoto
(based on the Kyoto Protocol, the international effort to control emissions
of greenhouse gases), already sells the Wattson, a device that displays your
energy use and allows you to transmit the data to a Web site, thus permitting comparisons with Wattson users elsewhere. Thompson suggests that
an approach of this kind could produce “a cascade of conservation.”
It’s not clear how many people would actually want to make their energy use public, and we don’t think that we’re at a stage when public
officials should require people to do so. But if people want to get into a
kind of competition to conserve more, who could object? The most
straightforward point is that if we can find ways to make energy use visible,
we’ll nudge people toward reducing their energy use without mandating
any such reductions.
Here’s a related idea: voluntary participation programs designed to assist not individual consumers but companies both large and small. With
such programs, public officials do not require anyone to do anything. Instead, they ask companies whether they would be willing to follow certain
standards that are expected to have desirable effects on the environment.9
The basic idea is that even in a free market, companies often fail to use the
194 HEALTH
latest products, and sometimes government can help them to make money
while also reducing pollution.
In 1991, for example, the epa adopted its Green Lights program, which
was designed to increase energy efficiency, a goal that (in the agency’s
view) was simultaneously profitable and good for the environment. The
epa entered into a series of voluntary agreements with both for-profit and
nonprofit firms (including hospitals and universities). Through these
agreements, firms pledged to implement energy-saving lighting improvements. In 1992 the epa adopted a similar innovation, the Energy Star
Office Products program, also intended to promote energy efficiency, but
with a focus on printers, copiers, computer equipment, and appliances in
general. The epa set out voluntary performance standards and allowed
participating firms to use the agency’s Energy Star logo. In addition, the
agency publicized the cooperation of industry groups, adopted substantial
media campaigns, and offered awards to companies showing particular
gains in energy efficiency.
One of the epa’s major goals has been to show that energy efficiency is
not merely good for the environment; it produces significant savings as
well. But from the standpoint of standard economic theory, no such savings should be predicted. Here’s why. If companies could actually save
money while protecting the environment, they would already have done
that. In a market economy, firms should not need the government’s help
to cut their own costs. Competitive pressures should ensure that those
that don’t cut costs soon find themselves losing money—and out of the
market.
In practice, however, things don’t always turn out this way. Managers in
firms are busy and can’t pay attention to everything. To implement some
change, someone in the firm has to champion the change. In most firms,
managers do not think that being the guy who pushes an energy cost–saving policy is the route to the ceo office, especially when the cost savings
are small relative to the bottom line. The project sounds boring and
penny-pinching, and the manager who suggests it might be destined for a
job in accounting rather than the president’s office.
In theory, the epa’s programs shouldn’t have worked. So much for theory. As it turned out, both programs have succeeded in promoting greater
SAVING THE PLANET 195
use of low-cost energy-efficient technologies. As a result, such technologies have become far more broadly diffused than they had previously been.
Because of Green Lights, cost-saving lighting programs have been
adopted in numerous places. Energy Star Office Products has led to substantial improvements in energy efficiency, yielding cost savings for those
who use the relevant equipment. Government accomplished all this not
with a mandate but with a gentle nudge.
The success of these programs offers broad lessons for environmental
protection. For those especially concerned about the problem of climate
change, the lesson is clear. Whether or not governments choose some kind
of incentive-based system, they can help to reduce energy use, and thus reduce greenhouse gas emissions, with a nudge. Public officials are often ignorant, to be sure, but sometimes they have useful information, and companies can literally profit from it. As a result, they can both do good and do
well.
196 HEALTH
PART
IV
FREEDOM
Libertarian paternalists care about freedom; they are skeptical
about approaches that prevent people from going their own way. Some
nudges are bad or just unwelcome, and all of us benefit if some of us are
permitted to experiment. In many areas, we would like to create freedom
where it does not now exist.
We have already explored a prominent example: environmental protection. Many governments have tried to protect the environment with rigid,
command-and-control regulation. Emissions-trading approaches, capping pollution and creating new markets, offer far more freedom. In this
domain, more freedom has growing appeal. Across the political spectrum,
public officials and ordinary citizens are starting to support emissions trading, not least to respond to the threat of climate change.
We now turn to three far more controversial examples. We support
greater choice in education, on the ground that competition is likely to be
good for kids. We also want to increase the freedom of patients and doctors. In particular, we want to increase their ability to contract with each
other (even if trial lawyers lose as a result). Finally, we want to get governments out of the marriage business. Some of the most heated debates in
American politics, involving same-sex marriage and related issues, could
be made much less hot with a little separation of church and state—and by
insisting on freedom both for religious organizations and for people who
love each other.
This page intentionally left blank
13
IMPROVING SCHOOL CHOICES
199
In 1944 President Franklin Delano Roosevelt included “the right
to a good education” in what he called a Second Bill of Rights, designed to
promote “security” and suitable for a modern democracy.1 Most Americans seem to believe that children do have a right to a good education;
there is a consensus on that point. One reason for that consensus is that educated people are more free. But the consensus breaks down when people
explore how, exactly, to achieve that right.
School choice remains an intensely polarizing issue in American politics.
The case for choice was originally popularized by the great libertarian
economist Milton Friedman. His argument is a simple one: the best way to
improve our children’s schools is to introduce competition. If schools
compete, kids win. And if schools compete, those who are the least advantaged have the most to gain. Wealthy families already have “school
choice,” because they can send their children to private schools. If we give
parents vouchers to send their children to any school they want, then we
will put children from poor families more nearly on a par with their more
privileged middle- and upper-class counterparts. Shouldn’t poor children
have the same rights that wealthy ones do?
Critics of school choice argue that such programs amount, in practice,
to an attack on the public school system that has helped make America
great. The critics worry that in the end, public schools, which serve diverse
people and allow them to be educated together, will lose both students
and money. They fear that vouchers will turn out to be a subsidy to rich
parents who can already afford to send their children to fancy private
schools—and even worse, that public schools will end up with the kids
that the private schools don’t want.
As libertarians, we are strongly inclined to support the concept of school
choice, because freedom is usually a good idea and because competition is
likely to improve education. But an abstract preference for choice does not
allow us to select any particular plan, and of course the proof is in the pudding. We have seen that the Just Maximize Choices mantra does not always lead to the best possible outcomes. So we need to ask, when it comes
to schools, do more choices actually help? Since the 1970s cities around the
country have experimented with choice programs, providing observers
with the chance to assess the actual effects of such programs. The evidence
suggests that while choice programs are hardly a panacea, they can indeed
improve student performance. Carolyn Hoxby, a leading economist who
has analyzed both voucher and charter school programs, finds that when
facing competition, public schools produce higher student achievement
per dollar spent. Test-score improvements can range from 1 to 7 percent a
year depending on the school and student—and improvement is usually
greatest among younger students, low-income students, and minoritygroup members.2
Even though the results suggest that school choice can and does help,
we believe that the results could be significantly enhanced by helping parents make better choices on behalf of their children. Many parents simply
do not make use of their options and instead just send their child to the default school (usually, but not always, their neighborhood school). And
those who do make choices are sometimes ill prepared to make good ones.
Because we approve of more choice, we want to focus on one important
part of the school choice issue—how to create plans that put parents in a
position to make sensible decisions for their children.
Complex Choices and Mental Shortcuts
Consider the revealing case of Worcester, Massachusetts. President Bush signed the federal No Child Left Behind law in 2001, with the
goal of increasing public school accountability by mandating certain testing standards. (We put to one side the many controversial questions raised
200 FREEDOM
by that law.) By June 2003 twelve of Worcester’s fifty public schools had
been labeled “in need of improvement” for two consecutive years, and five
for three consecutive years. That summer, forty-seven hundred students,
almost one-fifth the district’s student population, were eligible to transfer,
and eighteen hundred students had the right to collect federal money for
supplemental education services. But six months later, only one student
had switched schools, and only two had taken advantage of supplemental
services!
Worcester officials themselves were primarily responsible. True, the
school system notified parents at underperforming schools about their
rights under No Child Left Behind. But it also engaged in what the political scientist William Howell calls “friendly discouragement,” making parents reluctant to exercise their right to choose.3 The school system qualified its language about the meaning of underperforming, stressed the
limitations of the No Child Left Behind evaluation criteria, and highlighted unattractive parts of No Child Left Behind, noting that space limitations might not permit transfers to be processed. The school system also
explained that it was trying to improve.
For the undeterred, exercising choice was a tedious, multistage process.
First, parents had to meet with their school’s principal. Few did. Next,
they had to attend another meeting at a school information center. The
center’s director said that two parents expressed interest in such a meeting.
At these meetings, district officials again stressed that transfers were not always possible and that there were no guarantees about transportation or
school location. And all of that was before parents had to file the transfer
paperwork. Even worse, because the school district controlled access to information, tutoring service and test prep companies could not reach students without the district’s blessing. The companies essentially depended
on positive comments from the school district.
As with a 401(k) plan, the average parents know little about their child’s
school, let alone all the other schools that are available. They might well
stick with the status quo or ultimately make poor decisions. The trick is
to promote actual freedom—not just by giving people lots of choices
(though that can help) but also by putting people in a good position to
choose what would be best for their children. Consider a few details.
When parents pick schools, status quo bias plays a big role. The neighIMPROVING SCHOOL CHOICES 201
borhood school that one knows, failing or not, may be preferable to the
unknown school half an hour away. In any case, the Byzantine nature of
collecting and distributing school data makes it difficult for parents to
think through their options. In Charlotte, North Carolina, for instance,
parents receive a hundred-page booklet with descriptions of 190 schools
written by representatives of the schools themselves, emphasizing each
school’s positive features. The booklet does not include information on
physical locations, test scores, attendance rates, and racial composition—
these are available only on the district Web site. Meanwhile, staff members
at a special district-wide application center are instructed to respond to
questions like “Which school is the best school?” by saying that “a good
school depends on each individual child” and advising parents to talk to
their children about what their needs are, and to visit the various schools in
order to determine which is best for their children. Although this advice is
unobjectionable, it is about as helpful as when a waiter responds to an inquiry about what is good by saying: “Everything!”
A creative experiment in Charlotte shows that choices can be improved
with better and simpler information.4 Charlotte gave parents the option to
apply for admission at multiple public schools besides their default school.
Low-income parents tended to put less weight than high-income parents
on school quality, as measured by test scores, and rarely tried to enroll in
higher-performing schools. A random sample of parents was selected to
receive an abbreviated “fact sheet” about the schools—much in the spirit
of the recap idea that we have suggested in other areas. Printed on each
sheet was a complete listing of average test scores and acceptance rates,
from highest to lowest, at schools available to a given child.
The experimenters wanted to find out whether parents, and especially
low-income parents, would choose better schools. They did. Much better
ones. The parents who received the fact sheets made decisions implying
that the weight they assigned to school quality (as measured by test scores)
had doubled. The schools they selected had, on average, 70 percent higher
test scores than the scores at their neighborhood schools. This had the effect of making their choices similar to those of families whose incomes
were $65,000 a year higher. Furthermore, when children are lucky enough
to switch to better schools, their performance improves considerably. The
students who are lucky enough to win the lotteries held to decide who gets
202 FREEDOM
to attend the popular better schools are less likely to be suspended and
have higher test scores than the students who lost.5
Incentive Conflicts and Matching
A good choice architect can do more than help parents achieve
what is already in their own self-interest. The architect can also help reduce
latent incentive conflicts between advantaged and disadvantaged parents
during the choice process.
Despite the attention they receive in the media, market-based programs
like vouchers are available to relatively few students nationwide. One popular alternative is a policy known as controlled choice, which emerged in
the wake of 1970s court rulings prohibiting busing for the purpose of
achieving desegregation. The idea was to continue integration by guaranteeing students a priority space at a nearby school or a school that a sibling
attended, while giving them the option to apply for enrollment somewhere else.
School administrators in Boston adopted a computer algorithm designed to assign as many students as possible to their first-choice schools,
while still giving priority to the neighborhood students. It is hard to know
exactly how many districts use the so-called Boston system, because administrators do not always explain controlled-choice policies in detail, but
some of the larger metropolitan districts that employ that algorithm or
something similar include Denver, Tampa, Minneapolis, Louisville, and
Seattle. (If two students applied to a school with one open seat, Seattle and
Louisville broke the tie on the basis of race, a practice the Supreme Court
ruled unconstitutional in 2007.)
Matching as many first choices as possible sounds sensible enough, except for one problem. Picking schools in the Boston system turns out to be
a complex game of strategy, with the winners reaping the spoils. How do
the winners win? They lie, a little. Economists call it strategic misrepresentation.
There is a mathematical (and complicated) reason why lying is a good
strategy in the Boston system, but to get an intuitive feel imagine that college admissions suddenly operated on a national controlled-choice system.
Schools like Harvard and Stanford would be heavily overdemanded, and
IMPROVING SCHOOL CHOICES 203
locals would get preferential treatment. You would have only slightly better odds of getting into one than of winning the Powerball jackpot. (You
think property in Cambridge and Palo Alto is expensive now? What if living there guaranteed your child a seat at Harvard or Stanford?) Clever parents who do not happen to live in Cambridge, but who have been dreaming of sending their child to Harvard since the diaper days, would realize
the futility of listing it first. The Boston system attempts to match as many
first choices as possible, so if every honest parent in America listed Harvard
first, only Cambridge residents could sleep well at night.
Instead of taking their chances on a long shot, parents outside Cambridge would be better served to select as their first choice a slightly less
popular school such as Dartmouth or Cornell, say, where there are also
fewer students nearby getting preferential treatment. In the Boston system, parents who rank a school second or third lose out to everyone who
ranks it first—making it risky to use a first choice on a highly sought-after
school if a child has a low priority, and a complete waste to list such a
school as a second choice. Information about school demand is usually
available online, giving parents an incentive to tweak rankings based on acceptance rates and where their child has priority.
When the Boston system was first developed, almost no one intuited
this strategy. (Only a handful of people even knew how the algorithm
worked!) But over time, some parents figured out ways to gain an edge.
Not surprisingly, affluent, educated parents with large social networks
(they volunteer at school with other affluent, educated parents) learned
the tricks first. They performed better than less affluent, less educated parents, who routinely listed an overdemanded school as a second choice, the
worst mistake they could make. Who knows how many of their children
lost out on access to first-rate educations because of it?
The Boston system is still in place around the country, though not in
Boston. In 2003 a group of economists led by Al Roth at Harvard pointed
out these problems to initially skeptical Boston school administrators. After letting the economists poke around in the internal data, the administrators became convinced of their system’s flaws.6
In response, they adopted the economists’ new strategy-proof choice
mechanism, based on one used to match hospitals and medical residents.
204 FREEDOM
The mechanism does not penalize parents who are unsophisticated about
the choice process, allowing them to spend time visiting schools and seeing teachers, rather than estimating the level of competition to get into
each school. In return, administrators do not have to guess about parents’
true preferences so that the policy can be adjusted properly based on future feedback.
Nudging High Schoolers Toward College
Good choice architecture doesn’t need to originate with a wonkish professor and a powerful computer algorithm. It can be the brainchild
of a local school official or two. In San Marcos, Texas, the school superintendent and an administrator at nearby Austin Community College were
looking for a way to get more of San Marcos’s largely Latino student population into college. They hit on a nudge so simple and effective it spread
through the state faster than a YouTube clip. (Well, maybe not that fast.)
The nudge was this: in order to graduate from San Marcos High, a student
would have to complete an application to nearby Austin Community College. Because all it takes to get admitted to the community college is a high
school degree and a record of having taken a standardized test, completing
the application properly was tantamount to acceptance.
In San Marcos, schools run on a tight budget, and two-thirds of high
schoolers never experience higher education. The superintendent had no
outside funding to implement the idea, so she asked her teachers and the
community college for help. Students were pulled from English classes to
meet with the college’s staff counselors. In a smart piece of mapping, the
counselors didn’t try to sell the students on the high-mindedness of education. Instead, they hooked them with the universal symbol of teenage
freedom: the automobile. They talked about how much more money college graduates earned compared with high school graduates, explaining it
as the difference between a Mercedes and a KIA. Next, community college
administrators took a standardized admissions exam to the high school
and tested the students free of charge. The administrators also gave students financial aid information and had tax consultants offer weekend sessions for parents.
IMPROVING SCHOOL CHOICES 205
In the end, the nudge produced big results. From 2004 to 2005 the percentage of San Marcos High students who went to Texas colleges rose 11
percentage points, to 45 percent. Now more than forty-five Texas high
schools have similar programs, and schools in Florida and California have
created programs modeled after San Marcos’s. In Maine a state legislator is
proposing a law requiring high school seniors to submit at least one college application before they graduate.
We have covered a lot of territory in a short space. Milton Friedman was
right: at least in the abstract, school choice is an excellent idea, because it
increases freedom and offers real promise for improving education. Of
course, reforms should be assessed empirically, not in the abstract. Fortunately, existing evidence suggests that school choice has considerable
promise.
The major problem, and our principal concern here, is that what is true
for investments and prescription drugs is true for education as well: it is
not enough to make lots of choices available and then hope parents choose
wisely. School systems need to put parents in a position to think through
their choices, and to exercise their freedom rather than to rely on the default option. Both parents and children need the right incentives. FDR’s
“right to a good education” is not part of the Constitution, but it has become a cultural commitment, and a few simple steps could enable many
more children to enjoy that right.
206 FREEDOM
207
Every election cycle, presidential contenders unveil plans to make
health care coverage available to the tens of millions of Americans who lack
health insurance. The candidates decry our government’s failure, thus far,
to implement an effective plan.
Whatever happens in the long run, such plans are hard to design for a
simple reason: health care is really expensive. It is expensive in part because
Americans want access to all the best services: doctors, hospitals, prescription drugs, medical devices, and nursing homes, to name a few.
Of course, we can try to keep health care affordable on our own, by
maintaining healthy lifestyles, and by buying only the health care products
and services that we need. We can save money by visiting the doctor no
more often than necessary, and if we purchase insurance, we can choose a
plan that covers only catastrophic illnesses instead of coverage with low deductibles, which is much more expensive. But there is something that
every health care customer in America is forced to buy, whether she wants
it or not: the right to sue the doctor for negligence.
Our principal claim here is that patients and doctors should be free to
make their own agreements about that right. If patients want to waive the
right to sue, they should be allowed to do exactly that. This increase in
freedom is likely to help doctors and patients alike, and to make a valuable,
even if modest, contribution to the health care problem.
It may seem strange to think that we “purchase” the right to sue. Of
course, that right is not an itemized portion of the insurance bill—but it is
14
SHOULD PATIENTS BE FORCED
TO BUY LOTTERY TICKETS?
clearly included in the price. Compare buying health care with the purchase
of collision insurance on your car. The rate you pay depends on the deductible you choose. If you elect a small deductible, such as one hundred
dollars, you will pay a much higher rate than if you pick a large deductible,
such as one thousand dollars. (Hint: always take the largest deductible you
can. It will save you a lot of money over the long run.) Or consider a parcel
carrier such as Federal Express, which allows you to pay more for a higher
liability limit on goods that you ship. The same principle applies—the more
the company would have to pay you if it loses or drops your package, the
more the company charges you up front. But in the case of health insurance
(and many other domains of life, alas), it is not possible to buy the insurance
à la carte, with reduced rights to sue people if they mess up.
If it still seems strange to think that we purchase the right to sue, consider a simple fact: customers of many businesses face higher prices simply
because they retain the right to sue those businesses. The great economist
George Stigler once wrote an amusingly evil essay about an imaginary
world in which students had the right to sue professors who taught them
something that turned out to be wrong. The essay was called “A Sketch of
the History of Truth in Teaching.” Professors shudder at the thought, but
just imagine how much more expensive education would be today if universities and their employees had to carry mal-teaching insurance! (In
Stigler’s fable “the branch of economics dealing with how to enrich a new
nation [‘economic development’ was the title] was actually forbidden by
courts, on the ground that no university could pay for the damage its
teachers did.”) Not only would education be more expensive, it would
also be less effective because professors would be afraid to take any risks,
for fear of being sued. We suspect that many universities and students
would, if they could, contract their way out of the mess Stigler dreamed up
and agree to have education without the right to sue for bad teaching.
Similarly, many patients and health care providers would gladly enter
into an arrangement to eliminate the right to sue for negligence.* In return for a waiver of that right, a doctor, hospital, or insurance carrier could
208 FREEDOM
*We speak throughout of lawsuits for negligence, which are the overwhelming majority of malpractice cases. Waivers of the right to sue for intentional wrongdoing—
such as assault and battery—raise special considerations that we do not discuss here.
offer a patient a lower price for health care. Some patients would choose to
take the lower price and assume the risk themselves. Others would prefer
to waive medical malpractice liability and instead buy private disability or
injury insurance. But these arrangements aren’t available to patients, because courts have long held that waivers of medical malpractice liability are
unenforceable as “against public policy.” These rulings are the opposite of
libertarian; they deny people the freedom to make contracts as they see fit.
For patients, these legal rulings might sound great, a nice form of protection, and we will soon return to the question of protection. For the moment, just notice that it isn’t always to your advantage to be forced to buy
the right to sue. Suppose, for example, that people had the right to sue
their hairdressers if a haircut went badly wrong, and that the cost of this insurance raised the price of haircuts by $50 after someone who had received
a particularly gruesome haircut won a $17 million judgment. Would you
be interested in saving $50 per haircut to give up the right to sue if you got
a bad one? Would you be angry if you were prevented from doing so?
We know, we know, the analogy isn’t perfect, but consider this fact: both
health care customers and taxpayers are now forced to help pay for the
eighty-five thousand medical malpractice lawsuits that are filed each year.1
These lawsuits cost a lot of money—estimates range from $11 billion to
$29 billion per year.2 Exposure to medical malpractice liability has been estimated to account for 5 to 9 percent of hospital expenditures—which
means that litigation costs are a contributor to the expense of the health
care system.3 Of course these particular figures are controversial and may
be exaggerated, but no one doubts that many billions of dollars must be
paid each year to buy insurance and to fend off liability. Many doctors must
pay $100,000, or significantly more, in insurance bills every year. Your
medical bill reflects those costs.
The full costs of litigation actually include much more than judgments
that are paid to plaintiffs and the costs of litigation—the “direct costs.”
There are indirect costs as well, and patients must bear those costs too. For
example, many doctors practice “defensive medicine,” ordering expensive
but unnecessary treatments for patients, or refusing to provide risky but
beneficial treatments, simply in order to avoid liability. Another indirect
cost of liability—and an especially bad one—is that error reporting in hospitals and among physicians is discouraged.
MEDICAL LOTTERY TICKETS 209
At first glance, it might seem clear that patients benefit from the resulting system. If patients are asked to waive their right to sue, won’t they be
worse off ? Won’t they lose something important and gain nothing in return? The answers depend on what would happen in the no-right-to-sue
scenario. As we will soon see, it is not clear that patients gain a lot from the
right to sue. At the same time, part of the current cost is passed onto patients, in the form of higher bills, and defensive medicine can be bad medicine for those who want good care. Some patients might well want to
avoid paying a share of a provider’s liability costs, but—and this is the key
point—courts will block any deal between patients and providers that exchanges lower-cost treatment for a waiver of the patient’s right to sue.
Why do courts block such deals? The answer is nonlibertarian paternalism, pure and simple. Courts appear to think that sensible patients would
not waive their right to sue, and that doctors should not be treating patients without the threat of malpractice liability to deter negligent treatment. We are glad to acknowledge that patients are Human and may make
bad decisions. But we wonder whether mandates and bans are sensible in
this context—and whether freedom of contract, alongside a few nudges,
might not be better.
One reason to allow patients the option of giving up the right to sue is
that the deterrent effect of tort liability is overstated. Medical liability insurance tends not to be experience rated, which means (in less technical
language) that a doctor will pay the same premium no matter how many
times he has been sued for malpractice. Of course, any doctor would like to
avoid the ordeal and embarrassment of a malpractice lawsuit, but she generally need not fear the financial burden imposed by one. So there is little
reason to think that the financial risk of malpractice lawsuits is an important factor in getting doctors to perform better.
The deterrence argument is also undermined by the stunningly poor fit
between malpractice claims and injuries caused by medical negligence. To
put it bluntly, most patients don’t sue even if their doctor has been negligent, and many of those who do sue, and end up with favorable settlements, don’t deserve the money. One study found that fewer than 2 percent of patients injured by negligence at a New York hospital over the
course of a year filed a malpractice claim.4 Of the claims that were filed, expert reviewers found that there was no evidence of negligence (or even in210 FREEDOM
jury) in many of the suits that resulted in payouts to plaintiffs. But in many
cases where a plaintiff lost, the reviewers found that negligence had caused
the injury. In short, most patients who are harmed by medical malpractice
do not get any compensation, and many patients who do receive compensation were not harmed at all or were not treated negligently.
Other studies find little evidence that our current system provides significant deterrence against medical negligence.5 It is probably true that at
least a few doctors are more careful because of the threat of being sued, but
on balance, there is no reliable evidence that the threat is doing a lot of
good. Consider a small but relevant fact. One factor that influences a patient’s decision to sue is whether the doctor apologized for the mishap and
admitted fault. If an apology prevents a lawsuit, then the deterrent effect
of the right to sue is further reduced.
We are not arguing that the law should stop making doctors pay for their
negligence. But we do think that informed patients should be free to contract as they wish, and that many informed patients might want to waive liability in order to get a better deal. If enough money is offered, surely it
will make sense to waive. Consider the fact that even if a patient does sue,
and wins, he’ll get only a fraction of the award—about 40 percent ends up
with lawyers. Fortunately, few of us are going to be treated negligently;
and few of those who are will end up suing. If you can save something by
waiving your right to sue, you might well elect to do that. The point is especially important for people without a lot of money. Since it is impossible
to buy medical treatment without implicitly buying the right to sue, sick
people who can afford treatment but not the package of treatment plus
suit option will drop out of the market. So even if the risk of liability for
negligence actually does reduce the frequency of injuries caused by doctors, these gains could easily be offset by the losses of those who are unable
to afford treatment at all.6
Another problem with the current system is that jury awards for the pain
and suffering that may be associated with a medical malpractice claim are
highly erratic.7 It is difficult to predict, from the facts of the case, whether
a plaintiff will get a lot or a little. In medical malpractice cases, people are
sometimes awarded “punitive damages,” too, in order to punish the
wrongdoer. But punitive damage awards also have a lot of variability.8 So
patients are effectively forced to buy a kind of lottery ticket, one that might
MEDICAL LOTTERY TICKETS 211
be worth anything from millions of dollars to nothing, but that is, on average, worth no more than 60 cents for every dollar spent (the rest going to
lawyers). Playing the lottery can be fun, but should people really be required to do it?
Choice architects should be willing to recognize that many people
would be better off if they were given the freedom to waive liability. This
group doesn’t include only those who would otherwise be unable to purchase treatment. It also includes anyone who purchases health care and
would prefer cash instead of the right to sue. In fact, we think that negligence liability is probably a losing deal for lots of people. Paying for the
right to sue includes a subsidy for administrative expenses of the malpractice litigation system, as well as awards and lawyers’ fees for meritless suits.
Of course it is natural to worry that patients will, in a sense, be forced to
waive their rights—to do so for essentially nothing, because that’s what
health care providers want. But usually markets don’t work like that. Recall that the more insurance you buy, the more you pay, and the right to
sue is a form of insurance. So long as there is competition, patients will
have to get something for relinquishing their rights. We are confident that
if the proposal we are making were adopted, we would both elect to waive
the right to sue, and that many of the finest health care providers would offer that option at a real discount.
So what do we propose? Our most modest suggestion is that choice architects give serious consideration to allowing freedom of contract in the
context of negligence in medical care—with the thought that a libertarian
approach might well help patients and doctors alike. Of course, we are libertarian paternalists, not libertarians “full stop.” We recognize that patients might find it hard to understand the nature of medical malpractice liability and the consequences of waiver. Waiving liability should not be
done lightly or impulsively. In other domains, this view is reflected in state
law, which often requires waivers to be accompanied by procedural safeguards designed to ensure that the waiving party is fully informed. Waivers
generally must be in writing and must state precisely what is being waived.
Most important, courts are usually unwilling to enforce waivers that are
hidden in small print in long contracts.
We propose, then, that health insurance companies be permitted to of212 FREEDOM
fer plans with and without the right to sue for negligence. Since most
health insurance is purchased through employers, we hope that employers
would help their employees make informed choices. Of course, we know
that framing the default would matter a great deal. If waiving the right to
sue were the default, and retaining it would cost extra, most patients
would probably waive (recall that the default option usually sticks).
For those who are especially skeptical of malpractice lawsuits, we have an
even more ambitious proposal: patients should be presumed to be permitted to sue only for intentional or reckless wrongdoing—and not for mere
negligence. (Negligence is normally defined as the failure to meet what is
called the “ordinary standard of care,” a vague concept that tends to make
lawyers fight and judges scratch their heads. Intentional or reckless wrongdoing is a harder standard for plaintiffs to meet.) Under this approach,
patients would be offered a right to “buy” a stronger liability right, but
it would cost them a bit. This approach would undoubtedly mean that
waivers would be common. The offer to “buy” should be accompanied by
relevant information, so that people know what they are effectively losing
if they fail to accept that offer. The general point is that if fully informed,
some people would purchase a kind of insurance, in the form of a right to
sue, but many others would prefer to take their chances.
Waiver of the right to sue is just one way that doctors and patients can
benefit from freedom of contract. Many states have taken steps to reduce
the costs of malpractice cases. For example, California limits recoveries by
capping “noneconomic damages” (such as those for pain and suffering).
We can imagine accomplishing the same goals not through law but
through free agreements—allowing patients and policyholders to agree to
limit liability for noneconomic damages to an amount specified in the contract. Some countries, such as New Zealand, Denmark, Sweden, and Finland, have adopted an administrative “no-fault” system that is also used in
the American workers’ compensation system. These nations provide
scheduled payouts for predefined medical injuries regardless of whether
they are caused by negligence. An approach of this kind should dramatically reduce administrative burdens from an often laborious litigation
process designed to figure out exactly how much patients should be
awarded for their injuries.
MEDICAL LOTTERY TICKETS 213
In our view, state lawmakers should think seriously about increasing
freedom of contract in the domain of medical malpractice, if only to see
whether such experiments would reduce the cost of health care without
decreasing its quality. Increasing contractual freedom won’t solve the
health care crisis. But it might well help—and in this domain, every little
bit of help counts.
214 FREEDOM
215
We are hoping that the idea of libertarian paternalism will offer
some new ways of thinking about many old problems. We now turn to the
very old institution of marriage, and explore some of the questions that
have recently been raised about marriage and same-sex relationships.
We begin by offering a proposal that is highly libertarian, that would
protect freedom, including religious freedom, and that should, in principle, prove acceptable to all sides. We recognize that many people, including members of many religious groups, strongly object to same-sex marriage. Religious organizations insist on their right to decide for themselves
which unions they are willing to recognize, with attention to gender, religion, age, and other factors. We also know that many members of same-sex
couples want to make lasting commitments to one another. To respect the
liberty of religious groups while protecting individual freedom in general,
we propose that marriage, as such, should be completely privatized. Under
our proposal, the word marriage would no longer appear in any laws, and
marriage licenses would no longer be offered or recognized by any level of
government. The state would do its business, while religious organizations
would do theirs. We would eliminate the ambiguity created by the fact that
the word marriage now refers both to an official (legal) status and to a religious one.
Under our approach, the only legal status states would confer on couples
would be a civil union, which would be a domestic partnership agreement
15
PRIVATIZING MARRIAGE
between any two people.* Marriages would be strictly private matters, performed by religious and other private organizations. Within broad limits,
marriage-granting organizations would be free to choose whatever rules
they like for a marriage conducted under their auspices. So, for example, a
church could decide that it would marry only members of that church, and
a scuba diving club could decide that it would restrict its ceremonies to
certified divers. Instead of channeling every partnership into the same onesize-fits-all arrangement of state marriage, couples could choose the marriage-granting organization that best suits their needs and desires. Government would not be asked to endorse any particular relationships by
conferring on them the term marriage. We spell out the details of how
this would work below.
We then turn to questions of choice architecture. Using the principles
that have helped us analyze savings policies and other aspects of life, we
ask: How can the state design good rules to govern contractual arrangements between domestic partners (who will sometimes also be husband
and wife as a result of a private ceremony)?
What Is Marriage?
As a matter of law, marriage is no more and no less than an official
status, created by the state and accompanied by government entitlements
and mandates. When you are married, you get many material benefits, economic and noneconomic.1 State law varies, but these benefits fall into six
major categories.2
1. Tax benefits (and burdens). The tax system offers big rewards to many
couples as a result of marriage—at least if one spouse earns a great deal
more than the other. (There can be a big marriage penalty if both
spouses earn substantial incomes.)
2. Entitlements. Federal law benefits married couples through a number
of entitlement programs. Under the Family and Medical Leave Act, for
example, an employer must allow unpaid leave to a worker who seeks to
care for a spouse; it need not do so for “partners.”3 State laws often
grant similar advantages to members of married couples.
216 FREEDOM
*We duck the question of whether civil unions can involve more than two people.
3. Inheritance and other death benefits. A member of a married couple obtains a number of benefits at the time of death. A husband or wife can
give his or her entire estate to the spouse without incurring any estate
taxes.
4. Ownership benefits. Under both state and federal law, spouses may have
automatic ownership rights that mere partners lack. In community
property states, people have automatic rights to the holdings of their
spouses, and they cannot contract around the legal rules.
5. Surrogate decision making. Members of a married couple are given the
right to make surrogate decisions of various sorts in the event of the
other’s incapacitation. When an emergency arises, a spouse is permitted
to make judgments on behalf of an incapacitated husband or wife. Partners are far less likely to obtain these benefits.
6. Evidentiary privileges. Federal courts, and a number of state courts,
recognize marital privileges, including a right to keep marital communications confidential and to exclude adverse spousal testimony.
To say the least, this is an immense and diverse set of benefits, and we
have by no means listed them all. The benefits also tend to be fairly stable
over time; recall that the status quo is powerful, and there are sharp political constraints on any effort to rethink it. But economic and material benefits of this kind hardly exhaust the meaning of marriage. Crucially, the
state explicitly links these material rights and obligations to the symbolic
and expressive benefits associated with the status of marriage. For many
people, perhaps most, these symbolic and expressive benefits are much of
what it means to be married. So long as the state grants marriage licenses,
the status of “official marriage”—that is, marriage that carries with it a legal status—has immense importance. A couple that is married within a religious or other private tradition, but not with the authority of the state,
lacks an important kind of validation, regardless of the strength of that
couple’s private commitment or the importance to them of the religious
element of their marriage.
To see the importance of the state license, suppose that interracial couples were told that they could have access to all of the material benefits of
marriage but that they would be in a status called “civil union” rather than
“marriage.” Exclusion from the institution of marriage—from the official
PRIVATIZING MARRIAGE 217
status—would itself be an offense to interracial couples. In fact, it would
be unconstitutional. The state cannot tell members of such couples that
they receive material benefits but are not allowed to enter the legal institution of marriage. For interracial couples, it would not matter if their marriages were supported and validated by private organizations. In sum:
when people marry, they receive not only material benefits but also a kind
of official legitimacy, a stamp of approval, from the state.
Without State Licenses
We can now see that insofar as it operates through the government, marriage is an official licensing scheme—and that when the state
grants marriage licenses, it gives both material and symbolic benefits to the
couples it recognizes. But why combine these two functions? And what is
added by official use of the word marriage?
Compare marriages with other kinds of partnerships. When we decided
to write this book together, we had to make a set of agreements. We jointly
signed a contract with our publisher, agreeing how to divide the royalty
payments we would receive if anyone chose to buy the book, and we made
numerous other informal agreements about how we would write the
book. The legal system will protect us through copyright laws if someone
tries to republish our prose (and would also provide some rules if we had
gotten into a dispute leading one of us to quit the project in disgust before
the book was done). However, nothing in the legal system says that we
must or must not swear a solemn oath to be best friends, to eat lunch together at least once at week but no more than twice, or to forswear other
collaborations. Book writing need not be monogamous. But even when
our agreements are informal, and not backed by legal sanction, we take
them seriously and will in all likelihood abide by them. Insofar as the state
is concerned, why not handle domestic partnerships like any other business partnerships? Why not privatize?
State Control of Marriage Is Anachronistic
Our basic claim here is that state-run marriage makes it impossible
to protect the freedom of religious organizations to proceed as they see fit
218 FREEDOM
while also safeguarding the freedom of couples to make the commitments
they seek without being treated as second-class citizens by the state. But
we also believe that the official licensing system no longer fits modern reality. For one thing, the institution of state-run marriage has a highly discriminatory past, enmeshed as it has been in both sexual and racial inequality. This past cannot be entirely severed from the current version of
the institution of marriage.4
Insofar as it operated through government, the marital institution was
originally a means of government licensing of both sexual activities and
child rearing. If you wanted to have sex or to have children, you were in a
much better position if you had a license from the state. In fact you might
well have needed that license, no less than you now need a license to drive.
A state license was a way of ensuring that sexual activity would not be a
crime; and it was difficult to adopt children outside of the marital relationship. But official marriage no longer has this role. Indeed, people now have
a constitutional right to have sexual relationships even if they are not married—and people become parents, including adoptive parents, without
the benefit of marriage. Now that marriage is not a legal precondition for
having either sex or children, the state’s licensing role seems less important.
As a matter of history, a primary reason for the official institution of marriage has been not to limit entry but to police exit—to make it difficult for
people to abandon their commitments to one another. Of course, there are
good reasons for this form of policing, which can operate as a nudge or as
much more. Marriage might be seen, in part, as a solution to a self-control
problem, in which people take steps to increase the likelihood that their relationship will endure. If divorce is difficult, then marriages are more likely
to be stable. Marital stability is usually good for children (though children
can also benefit from the end of a bad marriage). Marital stability can also
be good for spouses, who may benefit from protection against impulsive or
destructive decisions that are detrimental both to their relationships and to
their long-term welfare.
Humans, as opposed to Econs, are certainly willing to consider legal
protection against impulsive decisions. (If Econs have impulses, their Reflective System keeps them under control.) We can even see the legal institution of marriage as a precommitment strategy, not unlike that of Ulysses
PRIVATIZING MARRIAGE 219
in approaching the Sirens, in which people knowingly choose a legal status
that will protect them against their own errors. Some states have in fact experimented with an institution called covenant marriage, which makes exit
extremely difficult. People can voluntarily enter into such marriages, just as
they can take other steps to protect their long-term interests.
But in the modern era, exit is much less rigorously policed. In most states
people can leave the marital form essentially whenever they wish to do so.
And it turns out that covenant marriage has made almost no difference to
the institution of marriage. Only about 1–3 percent of couples choose
covenant marriage when it is available, and not surprisingly, couples who
choose that option tend to be religious and to have a traditional view of
marriage, child rearing, and divorce.5 By and large, such couples already
have the commitments and desires that would tend to produce stable marriages. It’s hardly a bad thing that they can choose a form of marriage that
fits their goals, and libertarian paternalists are glad that the option is available. But the relative unpopularity of covenant marriage, and the evident
failure of the movement behind it, demonstrates that the noncovenant option is pretty “sticky” for nearly all couples.
Increasingly, marriage is not a particularly extraordinary contract. It is
dissoluble at the will of the parties, rather than a permanent status. Now
that exit is neither forbidden nor rare, it is hard to contend that the official
institution of marriage is essential as a way of promoting the stability of relationships. In any case, the civil union form that we endorse, along with
private institutions and their diverse norms, should be able to do the desirable work in promoting such stability.
Official marriage licenses also have the unfortunate consequence of dividing the world into the status of those who are “married” and those who
are “single,” in a way that produces serious economic and material disadvantages for the latter (and sometimes for the former). Many of these economic and material inequalities are impossible to defend. For example, is
there any good reason that a person in a same-sex relationship should not
be able to make medical decisions on his partner’s behalf or bequeath
some of his assets upon death without paying taxes? Private relationships,
intimate and otherwise, might be structured in many different ways, and
the simple dichotomy between “single” and “married” does not do justice
to what people might choose. Indeed, that simple dichotomy is an increas220 FREEDOM
ingly imprecise description of what people actually do choose. Many people are in relationships that are intimate, committed, and monogamous—
but without the benefit of marriage. Many people are in marriages that are
neither intimate nor monogamous. Countless variations exist. Why not
leave people’s relationships to their own choices, subject to the judgments
of private organizations, religious and otherwise?
Is Official Marriage Beneficial?
Those who want to preserve official marriage, and those who are
likely to be alarmed by our proposal, might be concerned with the interests
of children or the interests of the more vulnerable partner (usually the
woman). These are legitimate concerns. Let us take them up in sequence.
Marriage has often been understood as a means of protecting children,
and it should be unnecessary to say that this goal is important. But the
official institution of marriage is an exceedingly crude tool for providing
that protection, which could easily be ensured in better, more direct
ways.6 For example, the law could do much more to ensure that absent
parents provide financial help for their children. When a child’s interests
are involved, mandates are perfectly appropriate. Society can and does go
beyond libertarian paternalism to make so-called deadbeat dads pay child
support. Those who favor nudges might just add that some simple tools
might help. Consider, for example, automatic enrollment (without an
opt-out right in this case) of absent parents in a payment plan so that a certain amount is deducted from the relevant checking account on a monthly
basis.
In any case, there is no reason to think that civil unions and private
arrangements, religious and otherwise, cannot provide as much protection
of children as official marriage does. If children need material support, that
support can be required directly through legal institutions. If children
need stable homes, the question is whether an official licensing scheme
with the name marriage contributes enough to family stability to be worth
the candle. Maybe so, but it’s hard to see any basis for a confident answer.
If the concern is for dependents at risk after the dissolution of a longterm relationship, good default rules are the best place to start. A detailed
literature exists on this question; some of the most helpful suggestions are
PRIVATIZING MARRIAGE 221
both libertarian and paternalist, in the sense that they maintain freedom of
choice while also steering people in desirable directions.7 We shall have
more to say on possible approaches shortly. For now we note only that the
official institution of marriage is neither necessary nor sufficient for good
default rules.
From the standpoint of good choice architecture, then, a central problem with the current licensing scheme is that it is not nearly libertarian
enough. Of course, we recognize that no one is forced to marry, certainly
not by law. In this way, the institution of marriage is altogether different
from the kinds of rigid government commands that most threaten personal freedom. When democratic societies license marriage, they are doing
something very different from what they would do by requiring (say) all
employers to provide a specified level of health care, or all employees to
save a specified amount of money. Marriage might even seem to be a way
of facilitating private choices rather than eliminating them. But the licensing scheme is not merely a device for facilitation. It is very different from
the law of contract. The state does not simply permit people to marry
within their religions; it does not merely enforce people’s agreements. It
also creates a monopoly on the legal form of marriage; imposes sharp limits on who may enter and how; and accompanies the legal form with material and symbolic benefits that it alone confers. For those who believe in
liberty, this is hardly an unambiguous good.
We acknowledge that many couples may benefit, in one or another way,
from public statements of their commitments to each other. Many people
believe that the official institution of marriage helps to secure people’s
commitments in a way that is both an individual and a social good. But if
commitments are important, why not rely on civil unions and private institutions, including religious ones? Is government licensing with the term
marriage necessary at all? Many commitments are stable without licenses
from the state. People stay tied to their friends, their churches, their coauthors, and their employers for a long time. And even without a government licensing scheme or legal sanction, people take their private commitments seriously. Members of religious organizations, homeowners’
associations, and country clubs all feel bound, sometimes quite strongly,
by the structures and rules of such organizations. Recall that if some kind
of commitment is desirable, nothing in our proposal prevents people from
222 FREEDOM
making commitments through the civil union form or purely through private institutions.
In this light, what is the balance sheet for official marriage? Its benefits
are surprisingly low; in many ways it is an anachronism. The most that can
be said is that official marriage might contribute to a kind of commitment
that benefits both couples and children. On the cost side, official marriage
does not do a great deal of harm. But it does produce unnecessary polarization, confusion about the relationship between state-sponsored marriage and religious marriage, and intense grappling over fundamental issues and definitions. In the current era, the most obvious difficulty is that
religious organizations insist that they should be permitted to define marriage as they like, while same-sex couples insist that they should be able to
make long-term commitments without having a second-class status as a
matter of law. Our proposal simultaneously satisfies both of these opposing factions. The underlying problems would easily be avoided with a simple declaration that marriage should be for private institutions, not for the
state, and that religious organizations would be free to set their own rules
regarding who could marry. That declaration—a form of separation of
church and state—would have an additional benefit, to which we now
turn.
Nudging Couples
In our view, the official institution of marriage, and the debate
over its nature and future, have deflected attention from the key question
facing choice architects: What are the appropriate default rules for people
who make a commitment to each other?
It is here that good choice architects can make real improvements. We
cannot sort out all of the complex issues in this space, but let us sketch a
few proposals, which could be applied to any form of legal domestic partisanship (including marriages in their current form). Our motivation is
simple: if we were starting from scratch, no sane person could possibly devise the existing system, which is so full of confusion and arbitrariness that
in many states, even experienced divorce lawyers often have no idea how
disputes are likely to come out. At a minimum, the choice architecture
should be changed so that people can have a clearer sense of their rights
PRIVATIZING MARRIAGE 223
and obligations. More ambitiously, nudges should be introduced to protect those who are most vulnerable, frequently women and above all children.
As usual, the place to start is with people’s actual goals and intentions. If
people make explicit promises to one another, the law should generally enforce their promises. To the extent that people leave gaps or uncertainties,
the law must choose a menu of default rules. Unfortunately, people are
likely to need some steering when making long-term mutual commitments. As we have suggested, unrealistic optimism is at its most extreme in
the context of marriage. In recent studies, for example, people have been
shown to have an accurate sense of the likelihood that other people will get
divorced (about 50 percent). But recall the fact that they have an absurdly
optimistic sense of the likelihood that they themselves will get divorced.
It’s worth repeating the key finding: nearly 100 percent of people believe
that they are certain or almost certain not to get divorced!8
It is in these circumstances, and in part for that reason, that people are
immensely reluctant to make prenuptial agreements. Believing that divorce is unlikely, and fearing that such agreements will spoil the mood,
most people simply take their chances with existing divorce law, which is
(not to put too fine a point on it) a mess, often unintelligible even to specialists in the field. Also, it is sophisticated and wealthy couples who are
most likely to enter into prenuptial agreements, to understand the law, and
to obtain high-quality legal representation in the event of divorce. The result of all this is to leave most people vulnerable to the vagaries of chance—
and to a legal system that has an astonishing degree of uncertainty. When
prenuptial agreements have not been made, we believe that the relevant
rules should nudge the outcome in a way that will help the weakest parties—usually women. Typically, a woman’s economic prospects fall after
divorce, whereas the prospects of the man increase.9 It makes sense to
adopt default rules that insure against the most severe kinds of loss.
As a presumption, people should be permitted to make their own provisions if that is what they wish to do. If men and women freely agree to an
outcome that generally benefits men, the law should respect that agreement—and use other parts of the legal system, including the tax-andtransfer system, to help those who need it. Mandatory rules that forbid
people to agree on their preferred terms are not likely to accomplish their
224 FREEDOM
intended goals; people will contract around the rules by adjusting other
parts of the deal. But what people wish to do is likely to be affected by the
law’s default rules. If the law establishes a standard practice, many people
will follow it.
If the default rule says that special help will be provided to those who
have been the primary caretakers of the children, then that rule is likely to
stick. If joint custody is the clear default rule when neither parent has been
a negligent caretaker, people will have a plain understanding of what will
happen on dissolution of the household. And if the default rule says that
upon divorce the primary caretaker will continue as such, and receive
financial assistance, that rule will also tend to stick. In this context, the
stickiness of default rules can easily be enlisted to insulate the most vulnerable people from the worst outcomes.
Aside from helping the vulnerable, default rules should be clear in this
arena, because Humans, unlike Econs, have a self-serving bias when it
comes to negotiating settlements.10 Essentially, the self-serving bias means
that in difficult or important negotiations, we tend to think that both the
objectively “fair” outcome and the most likely outcome is the one that is
skewed in our own favor. (After the Chicago Bears play the Green Bay
Packers, ask both Bears fans and Packers fans in which direction the referees were biased.) When both sides suffer from the self-serving bias, bargaining is likely to reach an impasse, and people will spend a lot of time
fighting in court, sometimes ruining their lives (at least for a time). In divorce cases, emotions are running high, and each side is likely to think itself entirely in the right, and to assume that the judge will certainly see
things the same way. You might think that even if spouses are subject to
self-serving bias, lawyers are not, and hence lawyers should be able to
deflate their clients’ expectations; but in many cases, lawyers suffer from
self-serving bias as well.
The upshot is that where the law is unclear, long and intense disputes are
likely. Both sides would benefit if they could be nudged toward a smaller
range of expected outcomes, so that their expectations will have some
overlap. Families facing divorce will gain if the law provides an anchor or
range, helping people know what constitutes a fair or likely outcome.
To achieve this goal, the best solution is to introduce something not unlike criminal sentencing guidelines—a fairly narrow range of possible outPRIVATIZING MARRIAGE 225
comes within which a judge has discretion to consider other factors. In
many states, something similar is already in place, but for purposes of the
self-serving bias, the rules are less helpful if people do not know about
them. And research has shown that many couples entering marriage do
not have anything like a clear idea of what generally happens, with respect
to either child support or alimony payments, upon divorce.11 (If you are
married, or plan to get married, do you know how alimony and child support are calculated in your state? Oh, never mind. There is no chance that
you will get a divorce.) States should spell out clearly what range of support is generally acceptable, as a portion of income (subjected, perhaps, to
upper limits).
The best approach might be an explicit formula based on such factors as
the ages of both spouses, their earning capabilities, the length of marriage,
and so forth. Starting with the formula as an anchor, a judge could weigh
other considerations such as the standard of living during the marriage, the
health of the spouse seeking maintenance, the financial prospects of both
sides, and other relevant factors. The reasons for any “departures” from
the range would have to be clearly spelled out and limited to a small number of acceptable reasons for adjustment, because the whole goal of transparency in the process is to nudge couples toward settlement within an expected range.
But let us conclude with our broader point. With respect to marriage,
there are powerful arguments for privatization—for allowing private institutions, religious and otherwise, to do as they wish, subject to default rules
and criminal prohibitions. We have argued that states should abolish “marriage” as such and rely on civil unions instead. If religious institutions want
to restrict “marriage” to heterosexual couples, they should certainly be
permitted to do exactly that. If such institutions want to limit divorce (that
is, ending a “marriage”), they could do that too. The beauty of this proposal is that it would allow a wide range of experiments—increasing freedom for individuals and religious organizations alike while at the same
time reducing the unnecessary and sometimes ugly intensity of current
public debates.
226 FREEDOM
PART
V
EXTENSIONS AND OBJECTIONS
This page intentionally left blank
229
We have described a lot of nudges, but we are confident that there
are countless others. Here are a dozen more—mininudges, if you will.
Readers are warmly encouraged to add to the list by sending them to our
Web site: www.Nudges.org.
1. Give More Tomorrow. Many people have strong charitable impulses,
and we suspect that because of inertia they give far less than they actually
want to give. Their Reflective System wants to be charitable, but their Automatic System doesn’t get around to it. How many times have you
thought that you ought to provide some help but failed to do so because
the moment passed and you focused on other things?
A simple nudge would be a Give More Tomorrow program. The basic
idea, modeled on Save More Tomorrow, is to ask people whether they
would like to give a small amount to their favorite charities starting sometime soon, then commit to increasing their donations every year. (It would
probably be impractical to link the increases to pay increases.) If people decided to opt out of Give More Tomorrow, they need only make a quick
phone call or send a brief email at any time. We suspect that many people
would gladly join such a program.
Anna Breman (2006) has conducted a pilot experiment using this idea
in collaboration with a large charity. Donors already making monthly donations were asked to increase their donations either immediately or
starting in two months. The latter group increased their donations by 32
percent. We are involved with some additional experiments in collabora16
A DOZEN NUDGES
tion with our own university, and the initial results look promising. If the
goal is to increase charitable giving, here’s an easy way to do it. In fact it
would not be at all surprising if the Give More Tomorrow program produced far more money for those who need it—while also pleasing the
well-meaning but absentminded donors who want to give but never get
around to it.
2. The Charity Debit Card and tax deductions. A related nudge would
make it easier for people to deduct their charitable contributions. Keeping
track of donations and listing them on a tax return is burdensome for some
Humans, who end up donating less than they would if the tax savings were
automatic. An obvious solution is the Charity Debit Card—a special debit
card that would be issued by banks and accepted only by charities. With
the Charity Debit Card, any charitable donations are deducted from your
normal account, and your bank sends you a statement at the end of the
year with your donations itemized and totaled. You could also use the card
to keep a record of when you donate nonmonetary items like furniture or
cars, ensuring that your bank would know the value of what you donated
and add it to your end-of-year statement. The statement could even be
sent straight to the irs so that the government could automatically process
the appropriate deduction for you. By making donations salient, such a
card could make charity simpler and more attractive.
3. The Automatic Tax Return. Speaking of taxes and automatic processing, no sensible choice architect would design the current income tax system, which is famous for its complexity. Withholding was a major advance
that simplified life for everyone. Ordinary people and the Internal Revenue Service would benefit even more if the process could be made more
automatic. A simple step, suggested by the economist Austan Goolsbee
(2006), is the Automatic Tax Return. Under this approach, anyone who
does not itemize deductions and has no income (such as tips) that is not
reported to the irs would receive a tax return that is already filled out. To
file, the taxpayer would need only to sign it and mail it (or, even better, go
to a secure irs Web site, sign in and click). (Of course, the taxpayer would
be required to make changes if her status changed, or if she started receiving unreported income.)
Goolsbee estimates that this proposal would save taxpayers up to 225
million hours of tax preparation time and more than $2 billion a year in tax
230 EXTENSIONS AND OBJECTIONS
preparation fees. True, many people don’t trust the irs, so here’s one way
to assure them that our tax collectors are honest: if there’s an error, you get
the money back, plus a bonus (say, $100).
4. Stickk.com. Many people need help in achieving their goals and aspirations. Committing oneself to a specific action is one way to improve the
odds of success. Sometimes it is easy to make a commitment, as, for example, by cutting up your credit cards, refusing to stock your kitchen with
brownies and cashews, or having your significant other hide the TV remote until those leaves get raked. Other times it is hard. Remember the
weight-loss bet we described between two graduate students in Chapter 2?
Well, one of them, Dean Karlan, now a Yale economics professor, has
teamed up with his Yale colleague Ian Ayres to propose a Web-based
business based on the same concept. Ayres and Karlan call the business
Stickk.com.1
Stickk offers two ways to make commitments: financial and nonfinancial. With financial commitments, an individual puts up money and agrees
to accomplish a goal by a certain date. He also specifies how to verify that
he has met his goal. For example, he might agree to a weigh-in at a doctor’s office or a friend’s house; a urine test for nicotine at a clinic; or an
honor-system verification. If the person reaches his goal, he gets his money
back. If he fails, the money goes to charity. He also has the option to enter
into a group financial commitment, in which the group’s pooled money is
divided among those members of the group who reach their goals. (A
tougher, more mischievous, and perhaps even more effective option is to
give the money to people the would-be committer hates, such as an opposing political party, or the fan club of the home team’s arch-rival—think
Yankees and Red Sox.) The nonfinancial commitments include peer pressure (emails to family or friends announcing your successes or failures) and
monitoring one’s own goal via a group blog.
A committer’s goal might be to lose weight, quit smoking, exercise
more frequently, improve grades, or the like. There is even a creative section for people with idiosyncratic goals: climb Mount Kilimanjaro while
there is still ice at the summit (verification by photograph), travel to Mongolia (verification by passport stamp), learn to juggle seven oranges and a
watermelon (verification by video), run a marathon, save more money
(less creative, to be sure), use less gas and electricity (not so creative but
A DOZEN NUDGES 231
admirable), or whatever self-improvement people can conjure up and post
on the Web site.
5. Quit smoking without a patch. Organizations already exist to help
people make commitments and achieve goals. Cares (Committed Action
to Reduce and End Smoking) is a savings program offered by the Green
Bank of Caraga in Mindanao, Philippines. A would-be nonsmoker opens
an account with a minimum balance of one dollar. For six months, she deposits the amount of money she would otherwise spend on cigarettes into
the account. (In some cases, a representative of the bank visits every week
to collect the deposits.) After six months, the client takes a urine test to
confirm that she has not smoked recently. If she passes the test, she gets her
money back. If she fails the test, the account is closed and the money is donated to a charity.
The early results from this program have been evaluated by MIT’s
Poverty Action Lab and look very good. Opening up an account makes
those who want to quit 53 percent more likely to achieve their goal.2 No
other antismoking tactic, not even the nicotine patch, appears to have
been so successful.
6. Motorcycle helmets. Many states ban people from riding motorcycles
without helmets. To libertarians, these bans are questionable. They ask: If
people want to take risks, shouldn’t they be allowed to do so? To date, an
intense debate has separated the hardcore paternalists, who emphasize the
dangers and support bans, from the fans of laissez-faire, who insist that the
government should let people do what they want. The columnist John
Tierney (2006) has suggested a nudge-like way that states might promote
safety while maintaining freedom. The basic idea is that riders who do not
want to use the helmet have to get special licenses. To qualify for the license, a rider would have to take an extra driving course and submit proof
of health insurance.*
Tierney’s approach imposes some costs on those who want to feel the
wind in their hair; an extra driving course and proof of insurance are not
232 EXTENSIONS AND OBJECTIONS
*One reader of Tierney’s column suggested in a letter to the editor that a rider with
this special license should also have to display a decal certifying that he has signed up to
be an organ donor.
exactly trivial. But requirements of this kind are less intrusive than a ban—
and might do a lot of good to boot.
7. Gambling self-bans. Gambling raises complex issues, to say the least,
and we will not explore in any detail what a libertarian paternalist might do
in this area. (Suffice it to say that if we were in charge, we would not give
state governments a monopoly on gambling—especially if they choose to
specialize in gambles that offer the worst odds for customers, namely state
lotteries, which pay off roughly fifty cents on the dollar. Hint: if you want
to gamble with decent odds, start a football pool with your friends.) However, it is clear that gambling addicts are among us, and they need real
help.
Here’s an ingenious solution. Over the past decade, several states, including Illinois, Indiana, and Missouri, have enacted laws enabling gambling addicts to put themselves on a list that bans them from entering casinos or collecting gambling winnings. The underlying thought is that
someone who has self-control problems is aware of her shortcomings and
wants to put her Reflective System in control of her Automatic System.
Sometimes recreational gamblers can do this on their own or with their
friends; sometimes private institutions can help them. But addicted gamblers might do best if they have a way to enlist the support of the state. We
think that self-bans are a great idea and suggest that research be done to
explore ways to use this concept in other domains.
8. Destiny Health Plan. Insurance companies don’t like paying large
medical bills any more than patients do. There is room for some creative
efforts on the part of such companies to work with their customers to improve people’s health while reducing medical bills for all. Consider here
the Destiny Health Plan now offered in four states (Illinois, Wisconsin,
Michigan, and Colorado). The plan features a Health Vitality Program explicitly designed to give people an incentive to make healthy choices. A
participant is able to earn “Vitality Bucks” if he works out at a health club
in a particular week, has a child join a soccer league, or completes a bloodpressure check with normal results. Vitality Bucks can be used to obtain
airline tickets, hotel rooms, magazine subscriptions, and electronics. The
Destiny Health Plan is a clever effort to combine health insurance with
nudges designed to get people to live healthier lives.
A DOZEN NUDGES 233
9. Dollar a day. Teenage pregnancy is a serious problem for many girls,
and those who have one child, at (say) eighteen, often become pregnant
again within a year or two. Several cities, including Greensboro, North
Carolina, have experimented with a “dollar a day” program, by which
teenage girls with a baby receive a dollar for each day in which they are not
pregnant.3 Thus far the results have been extremely promising. A dollar a
day is a trivial cost to the city, even for a year or two, so the plan’s total cost
is extremely low, but the small recurring payment is salient enough to encourage teenage mothers to take steps to avoid getting pregnant again.
And because taxpayers end up paying a significant amount for many children born to teenagers, the costs appear to be far less than the benefits.
Many people are touting “dollar a day” as a model program for helping reduce teenage pregnancies. (Surely there are more such programs to be invented. Consider that a nudge to think of one.)
10. Filters for air conditioners; the helpful red light. In hot weather, people depend on air conditioners, and many central air-conditioning systems
need their filters changed regularly. If the filter isn’t changed, bad things
can happen; for example, the system can freeze and break down. Unfortunately, it is not easy to remember when to change the filter, and not
surprisingly, many people are left with huge repair bills. The solution is
simple: people should be informed via a red light in a relevant and conspicuous place that the filter needs to be changed. Many contemporary
cars notify people when the oil needs to be changed, and many new refrigerators have a warning light for their built-in water filters. The same can be
done with air conditioners.
11. No-bite nail polish and Disulfiram. People who hope to change certain bad habits might want to buy products that make it unpleasant, or
painful, to continue to indulge those habits. Through this route, the
Reflective System can choose to discipline the Automatic System through
products that tell the Automatic System: Stop!
Several products now accomplish exactly this task. Those who want to
stop biting their nails can buy bitter nail polishes such as Mavala and Orly
No Bite. A more extreme version of this concept is Disulfiram (antabuse),
which is given to some alcoholics. Disulfiram causes alcohol drinkers to
throw up and suffer a hangover as soon as they start to drink. For some
234 EXTENSIONS AND OBJECTIONS
people suffering from chronic alcoholism, Disulfiram has had a strong and
positive effect as part of a treatment program.
12. The Civility Check. We have saved our favorite proposal for last. The
modern world suffers from insufficient civility. Every hour of every day,
people send angry emails they soon regret, cursing people they barely
know (or even worse, their friends and loved ones). A few of us have
learned a simple rule: don’t send an angry email in the heat of the moment.
File it, and wait a day before you send it. (In fact, the next day you may
have calmed down so much that you forget even to look at it. So much the
better.) But many people either haven’t learned the rule or don’t always
follow it. Technology could easily help. In fact, we have no doubt that
technologically savvy types could design a helpful program by next month.
We propose a Civility Check that can accurately tell whether the email
you’re about to send is angry and caution you, “warning: this appears
to be an uncivil email. do you really and truly want to send it?”
(Software already exists to detect foul language. What we are proposing is
more subtle, because it is easy to send a really awful email message that
does not contain any four-letter words.) A stronger version, which people
could choose or which might be the default, would say, “warning: this
appears to be an uncivil email. this will not be sent unless you
ask to resend in twenty-four hours.” With the stronger version, you
might be able to bypass the delay with some work (by inputting, say, your
Social Security number and your grandfather’s birth date, or maybe by
solving some irritating math problem!).*
The Reflective System can be nicer as well as smarter than the Automatic
System. Sometimes it’s even smart to be nice. We think that Humans
would be better off if they gave a boost to what Abraham Lincoln called
“the better angels of our nature.”
A DOZEN NUDGES 235
*While we are waiting for this program to be invented, we have adopted a self-control device of our own as a substitute. When one of us gets really angry, he drafts the angry email, and sends it to the other one to edit. Of course, this won’t work if we get angry with each other, so we are hoping the program gets invented soon.
17
OBJECTIONS
236
Who would oppose nudges? We are aware that hard-line antipaternalists, and possibly others, will have serious objections.1 Let us consider the possible counterarguments in sequence. We begin with those that
seem to us weakest, and then turn to those that raise more complicated issues.
The Slippery Slope
It is tempting to worry that those who embrace libertarian paternalism are starting down an alarmingly slippery slope. Skeptics might fear
that once we accept modest paternalism for savings or cafeteria lines or environmental protection, highly intrusive interventions will surely follow.
They might object that if we permit information campaigns that encourage
people to conserve energy, a government propaganda machine will move
rapidly from education to outright manipulation to coercion and bans.
The critics could easily envisage an onslaught of what seem, to them, to
be unacceptably intrusive forms of paternalism. Governments that start
with education might end with stiff fines and even prison terms. The case
of cigarettes offers a possible example. Here we have gone from modest
warning labels to much more aggressive information campaigns to high
cigarette taxes to bans on smoking in public places, and a smoker would
not have to be paranoid to think that the day might eventually come when
cigarettes are heavily regulated or even banned altogether. Indeed, many
would welcome this for cigarettes, though most would not for alcohol.
Where do we stop? Sliding all the way down the slippery slope is unlikely,
to be sure, but faced with the risk of overreaching, critics might think it is
better to avoid starting to slide at all.
We have three responses to this line of attack. The first is that reliance on
a slippery-slope argument ducks the question of whether our proposals
have merit in and of themselves. If our proposals help people save more,
eat better, invest more wisely, and choose better insurance plans and credit
cards—in each case only when they want to—isn’t that a good thing? If
our policies are unwise, then it would be constructive to criticize them directly rather than to rely only on the fear of a hypothetical slippery slope.
And if our proposals are worthwhile, then let’s make progress on those,
and do whatever it takes to pour sand on the slope (assuming that we really
are worried about how slippery it is).
The second response is that our own libertarian condition, requiring
low-cost opt-out rights, reduces the steepness of the ostensibly slippery
slope. Our proposals are emphatically designed to retain freedom of
choice. In many domains, from education to environmental protection to
medical malpractice to marriage, we would create such freedom where it
does not now exist. So long as paternalistic interventions can be easily
avoided by those who seek to adopt a course of their own, the risks decried
by antipaternalists are modest. Slippery-slope arguments are most convincing when it is not possible to distinguish the proposed course of action
from abhorrent, unacceptable, or scary courses of action. Because libertarian paternalists retain freedom of choice, we can say, with conviction, that
our own approach opposes the most objectionable kinds of government
intervention.
The third point is one that we have emphasized throughout: In many
cases, some kind of nudge is inevitable, and so it is pointless to ask government simply to stand aside. Choice architects, whether private or public,
must do something. If the government is going to adopt a prescription
drug plan, some sort of choice architecture must be put in place. With respect to pollution, rules have to be established, even if only to say that polluters face no liability and may pollute with impunity. Even if states dispensed with both marriage and civil unions, contract law would have to be
available to say what disbanding couples owe each other (if anything).
OBJECTIONS 237
Often life turns up problems that people did not anticipate. Both private
and public institutions need rules to determine how such situations are
handled. When those rules seem invisible, it is because people find them so
obvious and so sensible that they do not see them as rules at all. But the
rules are nonetheless there, and sometimes they are not so sensible.
Those who object to nudges might accept this point for the private sector. Perhaps they believe that competitive pressures can combat the worst
kinds of nudges. Rental car or cell phone companies that push people in
bad directions might find themselves losing customers. We have raised
questions about this view, and we will raise some more; but let us put those
questions to one side and focus on the slippery-slope argument for government alone. Those who make this argument sometimes speak as if government can be absent—as if the default terms that set the background
come from nature or from the sky. This is a big mistake. To be sure, the default terms that now apply in any particular context might be best, in the
sense that they promote people’s interests overall or on balance. But that
view must be defended, not assumed. And it would be odd for those who
generally hold government in extremely low esteem to think that in all
domains, past governments have somehow stumbled onto a set of ideal
arrangements.*
238 EXTENSIONS AND OBJECTIONS
*A possible response would invoke the great British traditionalist Edmund Burke,
and in particular Burke’s arguments on behalf of the likely wisdom of long-standing social practices; see Burke (1993). Burke thought that such practices reflected not government action but the judgments of many people over many periods, and that the law
often embodies those judgments. Many traditionalists invoke Burkean arguments
against social engineering of any kind.
We agree that long-standing traditions may be quite sensible, but we do not believe
that traditionalists have a good objection to libertarian paternalism. Social practices,
and the laws that reflect them, often persist not because they are wise but because Humans, often suffering from self-control problems, are simply following other Humans.
Inertia, procrastination, and imitation often drive our behavior. Once our traditions
are brought down to earth, the arguments on their behalf seem stronger or weaker, depending on the context. We do not mean here to question the view that laws that really
do embody the judgments of many people often deserve support for that reason.
Evil Nudgers and Bad Nudges
In offering supposedly helpful nudges, choice architects may have
their own agendas. Those who favor one default rule over another may do
so because their own economic interests are at stake. When companies offer you a special rate for the first month, then automatically reenroll you in
the program at a higher rate after the end of the introductory period, their
primary motivation is not to save you the trouble of signing up for yourself. So let’s go on record as saying that choice architects in all walks of life
have incentives to nudge people in directions that benefit the architects (or
their employers) rather than the users. But what conclusion should we
draw from this observation? Real architects can have conflicts of interest
with their clients as well, but we don’t think they should stop designing
buildings. Instead, we try to line up incentives when we can, and employ
monitoring and transparency when we can’t.
One question is whether we should worry even more about public
choice architects than private choice architects. Maybe so, but we worry
about both. On the face of it, it is odd to say that the public architects are
always more dangerous than the private ones. After all, managers in the
public sector have to answer to voters, and managers in the private sector
have as their mandate the job of maximizing profits and share prices, not
consumer welfare. Indeed, some of those who are most suspicious of governments think that the only responsibility of private managers is to maximize share prices. As we have emphasized, the invisible hand will, in some
circumstances, lead those trying to maximize profits to maximize consumer welfare too. But when consumers are confused about the features of
the products they are buying, it can be profit maximizing to exploit their
confusion, especially in the short run but possibly in the long run too.
The invisible hand works best when products are simple and purchased
frequently. We worry very little about consumers being ripped off by their
dry cleaners. A dry cleaner who loses shirts or suddenly doubles prices will
not be in business long. But a mortgage broker who fails to point out that
the teaser rate will disappear quickly is long gone by the time the customer
gets the bad news.
The editors of the Economist, in a largely sympathetic treatment of libertarian paternalism, offered this cautionary note: “From the point of view
OBJECTIONS 239
of liberty, there is a serious danger of overreach, and therefore grounds for
caution. Politicians, after all, are hardly strangers to the art of framing the
public’s choices and rigging its decisions for partisan ends. And what is to
stop lobbyists, axe-grinders and busybodies of all kinds hijacking the
whole effort?”2
We agree that government officials, elected or otherwise, are often captured by private-sector interests whose representatives are seeking to
nudge people in directions that will specifically promote their selfish goals.
That is one reason that we want to maintain freedom of choice. But if private-sector interests are just following the invisible hand in furthering the
interests of their customers, what’s the problem?3 The more serious point
is that we should be worried about all choice architects, public and private
alike. We should create rules of engagement that reduce fraud and other
abuses, that promote healthy competition, that restrict interest-group
power, and that create incentives to make it more likely that the architects
will serve the public interest. In both the public and private sectors, a primary goal should be to increase transparency. Our various recap proposals are specifically designed to make it easier for consumers to figure out
how much of some service they are using and how much they are paying
for it. In the environmental domain, we have suggested that disclosure can
be an effective, and low-cost, monitoring device.
We would love to see similar principles used to monitor governments.
Require government officials to put all their votes, earmarks, and contributions from lobbyists on their Web sites. Require those determining the
future of energy policy (to cite a random example) to reveal which profitmaximizing firms were invited to lend their all-too-invisible hands to the
process of designing the rules. Require those determining the future of educational policy to reveal which interest groups, and which unions, gave
them money in the most recent campaign. Require government agencies,
not merely the private sector, to disclose their contributions to air and water pollution, and their greenhouse gas emissions. Supreme Court Justice
Louis Brandeis urged that “sunlight is the best of disinfectants.” Democratic governments, as well as authoritarian ones, could use a lot more sunlight.
In emphasizing the effects of plan design on choice, we hope to encourage plan designers to become more informed. And by arguing for a lib240 EXTENSIONS AND OBJECTIONS
ertarian check on bad plans, we hope to create a strong safeguard against
ill-considered or ill-motivated plans. To the extent that individual selfinterest is a healthy check on planners, freedom of choice is an important
corrective.
The Right to Be Wrong
Skeptics might argue that in a free society, people have the right to
be wrong, and it is sometimes helpful for us to make mistakes, since that is
how we learn. On the first point we heartily agree, which is why we insist
on opt-out rights. If people really want to invest their entire retirement
portfolio in high-tech Romanian stocks, we say go for it. But for unsophisticated choosers, there is little harm in putting some warning signs along
the way. We approve of the signs at some ski areas warning novice and intermediate skiers: “Don’t even think about going down this trail if you are
not an expert.”
We worry more about poor people who were duped into taking a mortgage they would soon be unable to afford than about the investment firms
that bought portfolios of those mortgages. That latter group should have
known better (though better disclosure would help here, too), and they
are likely to devise improved methods of evaluating the risks of loans on
their own. But how much learning do you think is good for people? We do
not believe that children should learn the dangers of swimming pools by
falling in and hoping for the best. Should pedestrians in London get hit by
a double-decker bus to teach them to “look right”? Isn’t a reminder on the
sidewalk better?
Of Punishment, Redistribution, and Choice
Some of our most extreme critics offer an objection that will strike
many readers as just odd. These critics object to any forced exchanges.
They don’t like to take anything from Peter to give to Paul, even if Peter is
very rich and Paul is very poor. They obviously oppose progressive taxes.
(Well, most taxes, actually.) In the areas that concern us, these critics
would disapprove of policies that explicitly benefit the weak, poor, uneducated, or unsophisticated. They would object to these policies not because
OBJECTIONS 241
they lack sympathy for these groups but because they think that any help
for them should come voluntarily from the private sector, such as from
charities, and that government policies would come at the expense of
other groups (often the strong, rich, educated, and sophisticated). They
don’t like any government policy that takes resources from some in order
to assist others.
We must confess that we do not share the view that all redistribution is
illegitimate. We think that a good society makes trade-offs between protecting the unfortunate and encouraging initiative and self-help—between giving everyone a decent share of the pie and increasing the size of
the pie. In our view, the optimal level of redistribution is not zero. But
even those who hate redistribution more than we do should have little
concern about our policies. Most of the time, nudging helps those who
need help while imposing minimal costs on those who do not. If people
are already saving for retirement, offering the Save More Tomorrow program will cause them no problems. If people are not smoking, or are naturally (or unnaturally) thin, campaigns to help smokers and the obese will
do them little harm.
Some skeptics might object that some of our proposals would require
the Econs to pay something (not a lot) for programs they don’t need and
from which they don’t benefit. But if the people who need the help are also
imposing costs on society—for example, through higher health costs—
then having the Econs share in the costs of helping the Humans seems like
a modest price to pay. Of course, some anti-redistributive types will object
to a health system that forces the rest of us to pay for those who need
health care. And it is true that on a relative basis the Econs may still lose
out from policies that help Humans. If Peter’s happiness depends, in part,
on his being richer than Paul, then anything that pulls Paul up by his bootstraps makes Peter worse off. But we think, though we admit to having no
evidence to support our view, that most Peters actually take pleasure in
helping out the worst-off members of society (even if the Pauls are being
helped by government rather than by private charity). As for those who
feel miserable if their poorest neighbors close some of the gap, they have
our sympathy, but not our empathy.
The most ardent libertarians have another arrow in their quiver. They
are concerned about liberty and free choice rather than about welfare. For
242 EXTENSIONS AND OBJECTIONS
this reason, they prefer required choosing to nudges. At most, they would
like to provide people with the information necessary to make an informed choice, and then tell people to choose for themselves: no nudges!
This view is reflected in the campaign by the Swedish government to get
citizens to choose their own investment portfolios and the idea that for
organ donations, people should be asked to make their wishes clear, without any default rule. Both policies represent a deliberate decision not to
nudge.
Although nudges are often unavoidable, we enthusiastically agree that
required (or strongly encouraged) active choosing is sometimes the right
route, and we have no problem with providing information and educational campaigns (we are professors, after all). But forced choosing is not
always best. When the choices are hard and the options are numerous, requiring people to choose for themselves might be preferred and might not
lead to the best decisions. Given that people would often choose not to
choose, it is hard to see why freedom lovers should compel choice even
though people (freely and voluntarily) resist it. If we ask the waiter to select a good bottle of wine to go with our dinner, we will not be happy if he
says that we should just choose for ourselves!
As for information and educational campaigns, one of the main lessons
from psychology is that it is impossible for such programs to be “neutral,”
regardless of how scrupulously designers try to achieve that goal. So to put
it simply, forcing people to choose is not always wise, and remaining neutral is not always possible.
Drawing Lines and the Publicity Principle
A while back Sunstein took his teenage daughter to Lollapalooza,
the three-day rock festival held every year in Chicago. On Friday night a
huge sign, with changing electronic messages, often showed the schedule
of performances, but interspersed that information with a message saying,
“drink more water.” The print was large; the message was accompanied by another one: “you sweat in the heat: you lose water.”
What was the point of this announcement? Chicago had been in the
midst of a terrible heat wave, and those who ran Lollapalooza were clearly
trying to prevent the various health problems that are associated with deOBJECTIONS 243
hydration. The sign was a nudge. No one was forced to drink. But those
who produced the sign were sensitive to how people think. In particular,
the choice of the particular words more water was excellent. Those words
were likely to be far more effective than blander alternatives, such as “drink
enough water” or “drink water.” The suggestion that we “lose water”
cleverly invoked loss aversion on behalf of staying hydrated. (As it happens,
Sunstein wished that he had seen the sign earlier; he became very thirsty
during the performance of the band Death Cab for Cutie, but the crowd
was so densely packed that it was impossible to go out to find water.)
Now compare an imaginable alternative. Suppose that instead of having
a visible “drink more water” sign, the schedules for the day were briefly
and invisibly interrupted by subliminal advertising. The subliminal advertisement might say, “drink more water,” “aren’t you thirsty???,” or
“don’t drink and drive”; “drugs kill” or “support your president,”; “abortion is murder” or “buy 10 copies of NUDGE.” Can
subliminal advertising be seen as a form of libertarian paternalism? After
all, it steers people’s choices, but it does not make their decisions for them.
So do we embrace subliminal advertising—so long as it is in the interest
of desirable ends? What limits should be placed on private or public manipulation as such? A general objection to libertarian paternalism, and to
certain kinds of nudges, might be that they are insidious—that they empower government to maneuver people in its preferred directions, and at
the same time provide officials with excellent tools by which to accomplish
that task. Compare subliminal advertising to something just as cunning. If
you want people to lose weight, one effective strategy is to put mirrors in
the cafeteria. When people see themselves in the mirror, they may eat less
if they are chubby. Is this okay? And if mirrors are acceptable, what about
mirrors that are intentionally unflattering? (We seem to run into more of
those every year.) Are such mirrors an acceptable strategy for our friend
Carolyn in the cafeteria? If so, what should we think about flattering mirrors in a fast food restaurant?
To approach these problems we once again rely on one of our guiding
principles: transparency. In this context we endorse what the philosopher
John Rawls (1971) called the publicity principle. In its simplest form, the
publicity principle bans government from selecting a policy that it would
not be able or willing to defend publicly to its own citizens. We like this
244 EXTENSIONS AND OBJECTIONS
principle on two grounds. The first is practical. If a government adopts a
policy that it could not defend publicly, it stands to face considerable embarrassment, and perhaps much worse, if the policy and its grounds are disclosed. (Those who participated in, or sanctioned, the cruel and degrading
actions in the Abu Ghraib prison might have benefited from using this
principle.) The second and more important ground involves the idea of respect. The government should respect the people whom it governs, and if
it adopts policies that it could not defend in public, it fails to manifest that
respect. Instead, it treats its citizens as tools for its own manipulation. In
this sense, the publicity principle is connected with the prohibition on lying. Someone who lies treats people as means, not as ends.
We think that the publicity principle is a good guideline for constraining
and implementing nudges, in both the public and private sectors. Consider Save More Tomorrow; here people are explicitly informed of the nature of the proposal, and specifically asked whether they would like to accept it. Similarly, when firms adopt automatic enrollment, they do not
make a secret of it, and can say honestly that they do so because they think
that most workers will be better off joining the plan. Can firms say the
same about forcing employees to hold shares of company stock?
The same conclusion holds for legal default rules. If government alters
such rules—to encourage organ donation or to reduce age discrimination—it should not be secretive about what it is doing. The same can be
said for educational campaigns that enlist behavioral findings in order to
provide a helpful nudge. If government officials use cleverly worded signs
to reduce litter, deter the theft of petrified wood, or encourage people to
register as organ donors, they should be happy to reveal both their methods and their motives. Consider an advertisement from a few years ago,
showing an egg frying on a hot stove with the voiceover, “This is your
brain on drugs.” The vivid image was designed to trigger fear of drug use.
The advertisement might well be deemed manipulative, but it did not violate the publicity principle.
We readily agree that hard cases are imaginable. In the abstract, subliminal advertising does seem to run afoul of the publicity principle. People
are outraged by such advertising because they are being influenced without being informed of that fact. But what if the use of subliminal advertising were disclosed in advance? What if the government openly announces
OBJECTIONS 245
that it will be relying on subliminal advertising in order, for example, to
combat violent crime, excessive drinking, and the failure to pay one’s
taxes? Is disclosure enough? We tend to think that it is not—that manipulation of this kind is objectionable precisely because it is invisible and thus
impossible to monitor.
Neutrality
We have stressed that in many situations government cannot be
purely neutral, but a form of neutrality is sometimes both feasible and important. Consider the case of voting. Ballots have to list candidates in some
order. It is well known that candidates benefit from being listed first. One
study finds that a candidate whose name is listed first gains about 3.5 percentage points in the voting.* No one should be happy about a situation in
which governments—which is to say incumbents—are allowed to choose
the order of the candidates’ names. With respect to ballot design, a principle of neutrality makes a lot of sense, and in that context, neutrality is often
thought to require randomness.
Why, then, do we think that governments should be trusted with nudging Medicare participants toward the insurance plan that is best for them,
or with paying for ads that tell people not to “mess with Texas”? Why is
randomizing ballots good and randomizing assignment to insurance policies bad?4 Part of the answer is that sometimes people have a right, even a
constitutional right, to government neutrality of a certain kind. With respect to the right to vote, the government must avoid deliberate nudging
in the particular sense that its choice architecture cannot favor any particular candidate. Something similar can be said about the right to free exercise of religion and the right to free speech. Government may not encourage people to join a “Pray to Jesus More Tomorrow” plan, or a “Dissent
Less Tomorrow” plan.
Outside the context of constitutional rights, there is a more general
246 EXTENSIONS AND OBJECTIONS
*See Koppell and Steen (2004). The effect is smaller when the candidates are well
known, such as in presidential elections, but when candidates have little name recognition or get low media coverage (as in many if not most local elections), the effect can be
even bigger.
question about neutrality, and it extends to both the private and the public sectors. We have criticized firms that nudge their employees into owning excessive amounts of company stock, but we have applauded companies that nudge some of their employees into saving more. Our basic
conclusion is that the evaluation of nudges depends on their effects—on
whether they hurt people or help them. Skeptics might argue that in some
domains, it is best to avoid nudges altogether. But how can firms do that?
It is not possible to avoid choice architecture, and in that sense it is not
possible to avoid influencing people. We agree that in some cases, forced
choosing is best. But often it is not feasible, and sometimes it is more trouble than it is worth.
True, some kinds of nudges are not inevitable. Education and advertising campaigns are optional, and they can be avoided. Should governments
educate people about the risks of smoking and drinking, unprotected sex,
trans fats, spike-heeled shoes? Should employers offer educational campaigns about similar topics? To answer these questions, we need to know
something about the Nudgers and the Nudgees. One question is whether
an outside agent (the Nudger) is likely to be able to help an individual (the
Nudgee) make a better choice. Part of this depends on how hard the
choices are for the Nudgees. As we have seen, people are most likely to
need nudges for decisions that are difficult, complex, and infrequent, and
when they have poor feedback and few opportunities for learning.
But the potential for beneficial nudging also depends on the ability of
the Nudgers to make good guesses about what is best for the Nudgees. In
general, Nudgers will be able to make good guesses when they have much
more expertise at their disposal, and when the differences in individuals’
tastes and preferences are either not very big (nearly everyone prefers
chocolate ice cream to licorice) or when differences in tastes and needs can
be easily detected (as when the government deduces that you are likely to
prefer a drug plan that offers low prices on the drugs you take regularly).
For all the reasons we have discussed, nudging makes more sense for mortgages than for soft drinks. Mortgages are complicated, and outsiders can
provide a lot of help. By contrast, no expert has much to offer about
whether you are likely to prefer Coke to Pepsi that would not be better answered by taking a sip of each. So to summarize, when choices are fraught,
when Nudgers have expertise, and when differences in individual preferOBJECTIONS 247
ences are either not important or can be easily estimated, then the potential for helpful nudging is high.
Of course, we need to be worried about incompetence and self-dealing
on the part of Nudgers. If the Nudgers are incompetent, then they could
easily do more harm than good by directing people’s choices. And if the
risk of self-dealing is high, then it is right to be wary of attempts to nudge.
There are some who think that any decision made by a government official
is likely to be incompetent and corrupt. Those who hold this view would
want government-sponsored nudging to be kept to a bare minimum—
that is, limited to cases in which some nudging is inevitable, such as choosing default options. But for those with less pessimistic views about government, who think politicians and bureaucrats are just Humans, not much
more likely to be stupid or dishonest than (say) business executives, lawyers, or economists, we can ask whether a situation contains special risks of
self-dealing. This makes it clear why leaving ballot design to politicians is
an obviously bad idea, whereas letting politicians hire experts to help pick
sensible default options for Medicare participants is probably a good idea
(especially if politicians have to report donations from insurance companies).
Why Stop at Libertarian Paternalism?
We hope that conservatives, moderates, liberals, self-identified libertarians, and many others might be able to endorse libertarian paternalism. So far we have emphasized the criticisms of certain conservatives and
the most ardent libertarians. A different set of objections can be expected
from the opposite direction. Enthusiastic paternalists might well feel emboldened by evidence of Human frailties. So emboldened, they might
urge that in many domains, nudging and libertarian paternalism are much
too modest and cautious. If we want to protect people, why not go further? In some circumstances, wouldn’t people’s lives go best if we took
away freedom of choice?
The truth, of course, is that there are no hard-and-fast stopping points.
We have defined libertarian paternalism to include actions, rules, and other
nudges that can be easily avoided by opting out. We do not have a clear
248 EXTENSIONS AND OBJECTIONS
definition of “easily avoided,” but we hold up “one-click” paternalism to
be as close as we can get with existing technology. (We can hope for “onethought” or “one-blink” technology in the near future.) Our goal is to allow people to go their own way at the lowest possible cost. To be sure,
some of the policies we have advocated impose higher costs than one click.
To opt out of an automatic enrollment plan, an employee typically has to
fill out and return some form—not a big cost, but more than one click. It
would be arbitrary and a bit ridiculous to offer an inflexible rule to specify
when costs are high enough to disqualify a policy as libertarian, but the
precise question of degree is not really important. Let us simply say that we
want those costs to be small. The real question is when we should be willing to impose some nontrivial costs in the interests of improving people’s
welfare.
A good approach to thinking about these problems has been proposed
by a collection of behavioral economists and lawyers under the rubric of
“asymmetric paternalism.”5 Their guiding principle is that we should design policies that help the least sophisticated people in society while imposing the smallest possible costs on the most sophisticated. (Libertarian
paternalism is a form of asymmetric paternalism in which the costs imposed on the sophisticated are kept close to zero.) A simple example of
asymmetric paternalism involves sunlamps. Sunlamps are consumer devices that let users get a tan without going to the beach. Typically a user
will lie down under the lamp, close her eyes, and remain there for a few
minutes. It is dangerous to stay under the lamp for more than a few minutes because serious burns are possible. (Of course, using the lamp at all
may be risking skin cancer, but we will follow the lead of the users of this
appliance and ignore that issue here.) It is the nature of a sunlamp that it is
warm. So a choice architect who is expecting error will realize that there is
a serious danger here: some users lying under a warm lamp with their eyes
closed will drift off to sleep and wake up with third-degree burns.
Now suppose that for a modest cost, the sunlamp can be equipped with
a timer switch set so that it can be turned on only for brief periods, after
which it shuts off automatically—a design common for the warming lamps
found in some hotel bathrooms. Should the government require that all
sunlamps be sold with such a switch? Asymmetrical paternalists believe
OBJECTIONS 249
that the answer depends on some kind of cost-benefit analysis. If the cost
of the switch is low enough and the risk of burns is high enough, then the
answer is yes.
Asymmetric paternalists also endorse a class of regulations requiring
“cooling-off periods.” The rationale is that in the heat of the moment,
consumers might make ill-considered or improvident decisions. Self-control problems are the underlying concern. A mandatory cooling-off period
for door-to-door sales, of the sort imposed by the Federal Trade Commission in 1972, provides an illustration.6 Under the ftc’s rule, any door-todoor sale must be accompanied by a written statement informing the
buyer of his right to rescind the purchase within three days of the transaction. The law came about because of complaints about high-pressure sales
techniques and contracts with fine print. Again a cost-benefit test, looking
at the benefits for those who are helped and the costs for those who are
not, could be used to decide when such laws would be imposed. Using
such a test, regulators would want to consider how big the imposition is on
those who have to wait a few days to receive the product, and how often
buyers would want to change their minds. When the costs are low (did
anyone ever really need to buy an encyclopedia right away, even before
Wikipedia was online?) and there are frequent changes of heart, such a regulation makes sense to us.
For certain fundamental decisions, often made on impulse, a similar
strategy might well be best. Some states impose a mandatory waiting period before a couple may get divorced.7 Asking people to pause and think
before making a decision of that magnitude seems like a sensible idea, and
we are hard-pressed to think of why anyone would need to divorce immediately. (True, spouses sometimes really don’t like each other, but is it really terrible to have to wait a short while before the deed is done?) We
could easily imagine similar restrictions on the decision to marry, and some
states have moved in this direction as well.8 Aware that people might act in
a way that they will regret, regulators do not block their choices but do
ensure a period for sober reflection. Note in this regard that mandatory
cooling-off periods make best sense, and tend to be imposed, when two
conditions are met: (a) people make the relevant decisions infrequently
and therefore lack a great deal of experience, and (b) emotions are likely to
250 EXTENSIONS AND OBJECTIONS
be running high. These are the circumstances in which people are especially prone to making choices that they will regret.
Occupational safety and health laws go beyond asymmetric paternalism;
they impose flat bans, and they undoubtedly do hurt some people.9 Such
laws do not permit individual workers to trade their right to (what the government considers to be) a safe work environment in return for a higher
salary, even if sophisticated and knowledgeable people might like to do
that. Social Security programs do not merely encourage savings; they require it. The laws that ban discrimination on the basis of race, sex, and religion are not waivable. An employee cannot be asked to trade the right to
be free from sexual harassment in return for a higher wage. These various
prohibitions are not in any sense libertarian, but perhaps some of them can
be defended by reference to the kinds of Human errors that we have explored here. Nonlibertarian paternalists might like to build on such initiatives to do a great deal more, perhaps in the domains of health care and
consumer protection.
Many of these arguments have substantial appeal, yet we resist going
further down the paternalistic path. What are the grounds for our resistance? After all, we have already granted that the costs imposed by libertarian paternalism may not be zero, so it would be disingenuous for us to say
that we always and strongly object to regulations that raise the costs imposed from tiny to small. Nor do we personally oppose all mandates. But
deciding where to stop, and when to call a nudge a shove (much less a
prison), is tricky. Where mandates are involved and opt-outs are unavailable, the slippery-slope argument can begin to have some merit, especially
if regulators are heavy-handed. We agree that flat bans are justified in some
contexts, but they raise distinctive concerns, and, in general, we prefer interventions that are more libertarian and less intrusive. We are much less
cool about cooling-off periods. Even warm. In the right circumstances,
the gains from such rules can be sufficient to make it worthwhile to take a
few cautious steps down that possibly slippery slope.
OBJECTIONS 251
18
THE REAL THIRD WAY
252
In this book we have made two major claims. The first is that seemingly small features of social situations can have massive effects on people’s
behavior; nudges are everywhere, even if we do not see them. Choice architecture, both good and bad, is pervasive and unavoidable, and it greatly affects our decisions. The second claim is that libertarian paternalism is not an
oxymoron. Choice architects can preserve freedom of choice while also
nudging people in directions that will improve their lives.
We have covered a great deal of territory, including savings, Social Security, credit markets, environmental policy, health care, marriage, and much
more. But the range of potential applications is much broader than the topics we have managed to include. One of our main hopes is that an understanding of choice architecture, and the power of nudges, will lead others to
think of creative ways to improve human lives in other domains. Many of
those domains involve purely private action. Workplaces, corporate boards,
universities, religious organizations, clubs, and even families might be able
to use, and to benefit from, small exercises in libertarian paternalism.
With respect to government, we hope that the general approach might
serve as a viable middle ground in our unnecessarily polarized society. The
twentieth century was pervaded by a great deal of artificial talk about the
possibility of a “Third Way.” We are hopeful that libertarian paternalism
offers a real Third Way—one that can break through some of the least
tractable debates in contemporary democracies.
Ever since Franklin Delano Roosevelt’s New Deal, the Democratic
Party has shown a great deal of enthusiasm for rigid national requirements
and for command-and-control regulation. Having identified serious problems in the private market, Democrats have often insisted on firm mandates, typically eliminating or at least reducing freedom of choice. Republicans have responded that such mandates are often uninformed or
counterproductive—and that in light of the sheer diversity of Americans,
one size cannot possibly fit all. Much of the time, they have argued on behalf of laissez-faire and against government intervention. At least with respect to the economy, freedom of choice has been their defining principle.
To countless ordinary people, the resulting debates seem increasingly
tired, abstract, and unhelpful—pointless sloganeering. Many sensible Democrats are fully aware that mandates can be ineffective and even counterproductive, and that one size may not fit all. American society is simply too
diverse, individuals are simply too creative, circumstances change too
rapidly, and government is simply too fallible. Many sensible Republicans
know that even with free markets, government intervention cannot be
avoided. Free markets depend on government, which must protect private
property and ensure that contracts are enforced. In domains ranging from
environmental protection to planning for retirement to assisting the
needy, markets should certainly be enlisted. In fact, some of the best
nudges use markets; good choice architecture includes close attention to
incentives. But there is all the difference in the world between senseless opposition to all “government intervention” as such and the sensible claim
that when governments intervene, they should usually do so in a way that
promotes freedom of choice.
For all their differences, liberals and conservatives are beginning to recognize these fundamental points. No less than those in the private sector,
public officials can nudge people in directions that will make their lives
go better while also insisting that the ultimate choice is for individuals, not
for the state. The sheer complexity of modern life, and the astounding
pace of technological and global change, undermine arguments for rigid
mandates or for dogmatic laissez-faire. Emerging developments should
strengthen, at once, the principled commitment to freedom of choice and
the case for the gentle nudge.
