Boston College University Libraries.
Boston College Electronic Thesis or Dissertation, 2015
Copyright is held by the author. This work is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License (http://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0).
Stepping Off The Conveyor Belt: Gap
Year Effects on the First Year College
Experience
Author: Lori Ilene Tenser
View metadata, citation and similar papers at core.ac.uk brought to you by CORE
provided by eScholarship@BC
Boston College
Lynch School of Education
Department of Educational Leadership and Higher Education
Program in Higher Education
STEPPING OFF THE CONVEYOR BELT:
GAP YEAR EFFECTS ON
THE FIRST-YEAR COLLEGE EXPERIENCE
Dissertation
by
LORI I. TENSER
Submitted in partial fulfillment
of the requirements for the degree of
Doctor of Philosophy
May 2015
© Copyright by Lori I. Tenser
2015
STEPPING OFF THE CONVEYOR BELT:
GAP YEAR EFFECTS ON THE FIRST-YEAR COLLEGE EXPERIENCE
by
Lori I. Tenser
Karen Arnold, Dissertation Chair
ABSTRACT
Taking a gap year between high school and college has become more common in the
United States in recent years, yet little research attempts to describe or analyze the
experience of the students who arrive on college campuses after such a year out. This
qualitative study followed 12 first-year students attending highly-selective private institutions
in the northeastern U.S. as they experienced the transitions from high school to gap year to
college. With varying levels of family support and high levels of personal motivation, the
students participated in a wide range of gap-year endeavors. The findings indicate that
students were heavily influenced by their encounters during the gap year, leading to strong
evidence of self-authorship among the participants, which in turn shaped the way students
pursued their goals when they arrived at college. Particularly influential were encounters that
involved independent problem-solving, participating in multigenerational relationships, and
immersion in new cultural settings.
The students’ transitions to college during the first year were marked by patterns of
Sovereign Engagement with regard to learning, relationships, and decision-making.
Commonly marked by internalized goals, authenticity in relationships, and greater individual
agency, “Sovereign Engagement” captures the self-authored perspective that these students
brought to their college experience. Contrary to suggestions in the popular media, not all
gap-year students found the transition to be seamless; nor were they uniformly motivated to
earn good grades.
As a summary of the findings, the Gap Year Impact Model provides an important
frame of reference for understanding the experiences, needs, and sovereign decision-making
patterns of gap-year students. The results offer students, parents, colleges and universities an
introduction to the lived experiences of gap-year students, who are arriving on campus in
increasing numbers each year.
<><><>
i
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
A guitar pick. A jewelry box. A backpack. A prayer book. A bracelet.
These are some of the precious objects students showed me; physical symbols of the
lasting impact of their gap-year encounters. Their stories were rich with texture — sounds,
sights, feelings, relationships, obstacles, and triumphs. Lena, Julie, Paulina, Peter, Mark,
Daniel, Layla, Maria, Vinny, Jackie, Tessa, and Andy arrived on their respective college
campuses in the Fall of 2013 after having taken a gap year. They graciously agreed to take
part in this study, and to maintain connections with me during their first year of college. I
could not be more thankful for their time, their energy, and their enormous capacity for
reflection. This dissertation is the result of their kindness and generosity. I hope that I have
done justice to their fascinating stories of growth and development.
I have been privileged to work with an illustrious and supportive dissertation
committee. The wise and wonderful Dr. Belle Liang, who provided context and connection
between students’ relationships and their college experiences; the astute and compassionate
Dr. Heather Rowan-Kenyon, whose own pivotal work on access to college informed the
development of my research questions and who reminded me to be comfortable with
ambiguity; and the astounding and indefatigable Dr. Karen Arnold, my chair, who possesses
super powers that allow her to read 100 pages faster than a speeding bullet, clarify theoretical
concepts more powerfully than a locomotive, and leap over immense hurdles of advisee selfdoubt in a single bound.
My journey through this program would have been far less rewarding without the
kindness, clarity and companionship of my esteemed doctoral colleagues Amir Reza, Mark
ii
Kenyon, Katie O’Dair, Kara Godwin, and Samantha Carney. I am inspired by each of you.
Thank you for your friendship and brilliance, your warmth and humor.
Annie Kelly began as a summer colleague and has become a trusted and dear friend,
whose assistance during the homestretch made it possible for me to focus on the substance of
this work without becoming derailed by tiny details. Karen Stein Shanley’s design acumen
helped my model come alive in graphic brilliance.
What a tremendous amount of patience and support my family, friends and colleagues
have shown me during this journey! My parents, Joan and Arthur Tenser, instilled in me a
love of learning and a fundamental belief that a little tenacity and a lot of hard work go a
long way. My siblings and their spouses, Caryl, Len, Jamie and Val, encouraged me with
unrelenting optimism through the entire process. Sam and Charlotte nourished and supported
and transported our family whenever our lives required gentle intervention. And the Red
Mountain Gang, my dearest and most trusted friends and companions, fortified me with
wisdom, love, tips for staying healthy and focused, and the inspiring promise of many more
hikes together at our favorite magical place!
My professional colleagues and students at Wellesley College have always believed
in me, offering ongoing encouragement, patience and support. Thanks especially to the
dream team of John, Joy, Susan, Jennifer, Ruth, Mary and Kelly, for reminding me to be a
shark, unlimited by the partial view that is visible through the skylight!
I extend my deepest love and gratitude to my children: Celia, Jeremy, and Reuben.
My enormous pride in completing this dissertation is trivial compared to my profound pride
in you. It is because of you that every available ounce of my energy propelled me forward!
Thank you for Sundays at Panera, for musical interludes from Stravinsky to Sara Bareilles to
iii
Bruno Mars, and for reminding me about the things that truly matter. For you, this
dissertation is free of unnecessary emoticons and the eight common allergens.
I am humbly indebted, most of all, to Alan, the love of my life and the first doctor in
our family, who never, ever, doubted me for a minute. Not. Once.
This study explored the journeys of self-discovery taken by gap-year students. It
became, as it should have, a similar journey for me.
“It is good to have an end to journey toward;
but it is the journey that matters, in the end.”
— Ursula K. LeGuin
iv
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Acknowledgments i
List of Figures/Tables vii
1. Chapter One: Overview of the Study 1
a. Statement of the Problem 1
b. Purpose of the Study 3
c. Significance of the Study 5
d. Defining the Gap-Year Phenomenon 11
e. Postulated Gap-Year Outcomes 12
f. Overview of Research Design 15
g. Personal Experience with the Topic 16
h. Summary 17
2. Chapter Two: Review of the Literature 18
a. Overview 18
b. Looking at Delayed Student Entry to College 18
c. The Transition to College During the First Year 23
d. Cultural Capital and the Decision to Elect a Gap Year 32
e. Researching the Gap-Year Phenomenon 35
f. Conditions Supporting the Proliferation
of Gap-Year Programs 40
g. Theoretical Framework 43
1. Bronfenbrenner’s Ecology Model 43
2. Baxter Magolda’s Theories of Self-Authorship 46
3. Relational Health 49
3. Chapter Three: Methodology 51
a. Overview 51
b. Data Collection and Timeline 53
• Table 3a: Sequence of Data Collection 54
• Table 3b: Data Collection Details 54
c. Institutional Sites 55
d. Participants 56
e. Research Design 60
1. Individual Interviews 62
v
2. Focus Groups 63
3. Responses to Written Prompts 64
4. Uses of Technology 65
f. Anonymity vs. Confidentiality 66
g. Analysis and Reliability 69
• Figure 3: Codes to Clusters 74
4. Chapter Four: Sample, Model Overview,
and Gap Year Antecedents 75
a. Introduction 75
b. Overview of the Findings 77
• Table 4a: Gap Year Study Participants 80
c. Study Participants 81
• Figure 4: Gap Year Impact Model 83
d. Overview of the Gap Year Impact Model 84
e. Gap Year Impact Model: Before the Gap Year Decision 87
1. Clear Family Expectations About College Attendance 89
2. Strong Record of High School Achievement 93
3. Viability of the Gap Year 95
f. Gap Year Decision Making 101
g. Conclusion 105
5. Chapter Five: Gap Year Encounters and Meaning Making 106
a. Introduction 106
b. Gap Year Impact Model: Encounter 106
• Figure 5: Participants’ Gap Year Encounters 107
c. Stories about Encounters 112
d. Encounters Lead to Meaning Making 117
e. Gap Year Impact Model: Accelerated Process
 of Meaning Making 117
f. Meaning Making: How They Changed 123
6. Chapter Six: Sovereign Engagement in College 127
a. Introduction 127
b. Evidence of Sovereign Engagement in College 127
1. Taking Responsibility for Academic Performance 130
2. Learning for the Sake of Learning 134
3. Viewing College as Short-Term and a Privilege 135
4. Letting Go of “FOMO” 137
5. Pursuit of Authentic relationships 141
i. Authenticity in Existing Relationships 143
ii. Authenticity in Relationships
 During the Gap Year 144
vi
iii. Authenticity in New Relationships 147
6. Sharing Their Stories 150
7. Making Decisions Congruent with Internal Voice 153
c. Living in the Real World 156
7. Chapter Seven: Discussion 159
a. Introduction 159
b. Gap-Year Students: Who Are They? 160
c. It's What They Do With It 162
d. Limitations 165
e. Implications for Further Research 169
f. Implications for Practice 173
g. Implications for Students 174
h. Implications for High School Guidance Counselors,
Parents, and College Consultants 175
i. Implications for Colleges and Universities 177
j. Conclusion 179
Appendices
Appendix A: Initial Invitation to Potential Participants 181
Appendix B: Qualtrics Survey 182
Appendix C: Interview Protocols 184
Appendix D: Focus Group Protocol 190
Appendix E: Monthly Written Prompts 193
Appendix F: Revised Informed Consent Form 194
Appendix G: Derivation of Gap Year Impact Model 196
Appendix H: Institutional Names 201
Appendix I: Reflections on Walker Percy’s
The Loss of the Creature (1975) 203
Appendix J: Participant Profiles 205
References 220
vii
List of Figures and Tables
Table 3a: Sequence of Data Collection 54
Table 3b: Data Collection Details 54
Figure 3: Codes to Clusters 74
Table 4a: Gap Year Study Participants 80
Figure 4: Gap Year Impact Model 83
Figure 5: Participants’ Gap Year Encounters 107
1
CHAPTER ONE: OVERVIEW OF THE STUDY
Statement of the Problem
The first year of college is known to be a time of significant transition and growth,
and student adjustment during the first year of college has been studied extensively by
researchers in the field (Christie & Dinham, 1991; Evans, et al., 2010; Pascarella &
Terenzini, 2005; Skipper, 2005; Upcraft, Gardner, & Barefoot, 2005). Overwhelmingly, the
literature is based on traditional (17-19 year-old) students who move directly to college after
graduating from high school. What happens, however, when a student takes time off
between high school and college? The group of students known as “gap-year students” –
those who choose to take a year off between high school and college, often to travel or do
volunteer work – has not been the subject of extensive scholarly research. Existing literature
might group these students within a broader category of nontraditional students, along with
those who are adults, single parents, or who attend school part time; however, gap-year
students as an increasing subpopulation among first-year college students are missing from
the conversation.
A growing cohort of individuals and organizations posit that there are tremendous
benefits to taking a gap year after high school graduation and before the first year of college.
An apparent surge in the popularity of gap-year experiences has led to increased curiosity
about who takes a gap year, under what circumstances, and to what advantage. Despite the
confident claims of gap-year professionals, it remains unclear how taking a gap year may
impact the experience of students when they embark on their first year of college. This study
seeks to understand a group of gap-year students as they make the adjustment to college after
2
a year away from school, through a series of interviews, directed written reflections, and
focus groups during their first college year.
It stands to reason that students who choose to take a gap year may, as a result of the
time spent out of a school environment, experience their first year of college differently than
do many traditional students who go directly onto college after completing high school. To
date, however, only a few studies have attempted to make sense of the existence of gap-year
students, and fewer still have focused on the academic or psychosocial adjustment to college
made by gap-year students. Neither have researchers explored the extent to which these gapyear students identify their own experience as different from those of more traditional firstyears. Research in this area should offer insight into the adjustment of this growing cohort of
first-year students, and may in turn be useful to colleges and universities that offer accepted
students the opportunity to defer before beginning their first college year. Specifically, a
better understanding of gap-year students will help practitioners provide support and
guidance to these young women and men as they arrive on college and university campuses
to pursue their educational goals. If going from a gap year to college differs from going
directly from high school to college, the field of higher education must make room for these
students. Whether they are poised for a smoother adjustment, or a rockier one, or if perhaps
there is no detectable difference – this should be of considerable interest to the field of higher
education, and particularly to those who study or monitor the first-year experience.
As gap-year students emerge as a distinct subpopulation on American college
campuses, they may begin to have an impact on admissions processes, the provision of
student services, and measures of student success and persistence. Furthermore, just as
institutions have sought to understand the stories of students of color, transfer students, non-
3
traditional aged students, veterans, and international students, understanding the stories of
gap-year students may help colleges and universities define how student services should be
designed to address their distinct needs and interests.
Additional information about the impact of a gap year also may be valuable to parents
and high school guidance counselors, as they help students identify their post-secondary
goals and expectations. Therefore, it is important to consider how gap-year students
experience the first year of college, and the ways in which their perceptions and patterns of
adjustment are similar to or different than those of other first-year students. To begin to
understand their experiences, this qualitative study examined the lived experience of 12 gapyear students during the course of their first semester in college. This mode of research
allows us to “understand the meaning of events and interactions” encountered by gap-year
students (Bogdan & Bilkin, 2007, p. 25), and provides a rich look at the transitional journeys
of these students.
Purpose of the Study
“Those who take a gap year straight from school arrive at university refreshed,
focused, and they succeed. They're far less likely to drop out of their chosen course. They're
more mature, they're able to contribute to tutorials, they're more globally aware. In short,
they turn out to be jolly good university students.”
~ Richard Oliver, Chief Executive of the Year Out Group,
 BBC broadcast, September 2010
4
“Gappers are distinct because they have a set of experiences different from those of
their peers; they tend to be more mature; they develop leadership and coping skills earlier
than most of their classmates.”
~ Haigler and Nelson, in The Gap-Year Advantage, 2005
For years taking a gap year has been a popular option in the United Kingdom and
Australia. During the past decade in particular, these numbers appear to have been
increasing. For example, since 2002, approximately 7.7% of university applicants in the UK
have chosen to defer their acceptance by one year (Abidi, 2004; Griffith, 2008) and use the
time for other experiences. According to one report, the numbers of gap-year students in
Australia have recently reached 11% of high school graduates, compared with 7.9% in the
UK (Birch & Miller, 2007). Another Australian study estimates that 20% of recent high
school graduates took a gap year (Curtis, Mlotkowski, & Lumsden, 2012). The British
government has officially endorsed the gap year, and in 2002 launched a series of steps
designed to encourage volunteer-based experiences, in hopes of improving social citizenship,
boosting job skills, and improving access to education (Abidi, 2004, p. 13).
But does a gap year reliably help to turn out “jolly good university students,” as
Richard Oliver of England’s Year Out Group asserts? Are such students predictably more
mature and better leaders than their peers, which Haigler and Nelson confidently claim? To
begin examining these issues, it is essential for us to know what it is like for these students to
enter college after their gap year.
To delve into gap-year students’ experiences, the following primary research question
and subquestions have guided this study:
5
Research Question: How do gap-year students experience the transition to college
during their first semester?
• Subquestion 1: What patterns or issues are evident in the academic, social, and
personal adjustment to college made by gap-year students?
• Subquestion 2: To what extent do gap-year students identify their own experience
during the first semester of college as different from that of traditional first-year
students?
• Subquestion 3: What are the common antecedent conditions and gap-year
experiences that shape the students’ transition to the college environment?
Significance of the Study
According to recent news reports (Grose, 2010; MacDonald, 2008; Mohn, 2010,
2011; Rinehart, 2013; Ruiz, 2011; Shellenbarger, 2010; Smith, 2008; Tucker, 2012),
choosing to take a year off between high school and college is now becoming more common
for young people in the United States, who are following in the footsteps of their counterparts
in Australia and the UK. Some stories in the popular press have suggested that the stress of
competitive high school environments “leaves students drained and craving refreshment”
(MacDonald, 2008), or that gap year students are trying to “reclaim the down time that used
to come naturally” (Smith, 2008). The implication is that students work so diligently during
high school – presumably so they will gain acceptance into a reputable college – that they are
too exhausted to go directly to college when they graduate.
However – and perhaps paradoxically – another salient aspect of the developing gapyear phenomenon in this country is that it is typically a carefully-planned, very busy period
6
of time. Whether choosing to work to earn money to help pay for their education, deciding
to travel alone or on a guided expedition, or opting to do community service, gap-year
students are filling their “time off” with a great deal of productivity. Some suggest this will
make them better prepared for the college experiences that await them. In fact, this attitude
seems to be gaining credence with high school guidance counselors and college admissions
officers, and is evident in some shifts in admissions policies.
Increasingly, American colleges and universities are offering students the opportunity
to defer enrollment for one year after acceptance, which allows individuals to indulge their
desire to travel, engage in community service, or pursue other interests. For example, some
elite institutions – including Middlebury College, Harvard University, and Princeton
University – have begun accepting students with the encouragement or the explicit condition
that they embark on a full-year or half-year experience prior to matriculation. Middlebury
regularly admits a cohort of 90 to 100 students affectionately known as “Febs,” who are
offered mid-year acceptance into the first-year class, and encouraged to pursue other
activities during their intervening Febmester, described on Middlebury’s website. The Dean
of Admissions at Harvard advocates finding ways to relieve the stress and frenetic pace of
childhood and high school, indicating to prospective students that “(p)erhaps the best way of
all to get the full benefit of a ‘time-off’ is to postpone entrance to college for a year”
(Fitzsimmons, McGrath, & Ducey, 2011, “Taking time off before or during college,” para.
1). And in 2009, Princeton proactively formalized the gap year option by designing its own
selective, community service-focused bridge program, “making it easier for students who
want to delay matriculation specifically to do community service abroad” (Greenwood, 2009,
“Mind the gap: For some students, the best way to kick off a Princeton education is to go
7
somewhere else,” para. 5). Most recently, Tufts University established a service learning
program, known as Tufts 1+4, as a full year bridge program that is focused on community
service (Schonfeld, 2014).
As if to underscore these trends, a burgeoning field of gap-year organizations, both in
Europe and the U.S., specializes in helping high school students identify productive and
satisfying gap-year activities, and in some cases actually structure and operate their own
programs. Groups offering such experiences bill them on their websites and in promotional
materials as important for skill-building, as a way of giving back to one’s community or
protecting the environment, or as a significant step in one’s personal growth and
development. With a considerable presence on the Internet as well as strong marketing
departments, some prominent groups serve as clearinghouses for other entities offering
specialized internships, volunteer experiences, or travel options.
Many well-known organizations – including City Year, the Center for Interim
Programs, Global Citizen Year, National Outdoor Leadership School, Thinking Beyond
Borders, and Year Out Group – have begun to participate in annual Gap-Year Fairs now held
at 30 locations around the country. Sponsored by Dynamy Internship Year and modeled after
the popular college fairs that showcase admission representatives from different schools,
Gap-Year Fairs bring together representatives from a collection of organizations, offering
students opportunities to explore a variety of structured gap-year experiences, most of which
are for-profit ventures for the sponsors. In an effort to attract students and their families to
the Gap-Year Fair, the website usagapyearfairs.org claims that gap-year experiences “give
students a developmental advantage over their peers by providing them with an opportunity
to expand their perspective and gain direction that give the college years meaning and
8
focus,” and suggest that high school students will enhance their likelihood to graduate from
college by using a gap year productively.
Gap-year organizations and web-based resources also have increased in popularity in
recent years. Many promote specific internship, travel, or service options as “solutions” to
creating a productive and well-structured gap-year experience that may involve training,
travel, service or language study. As they gain momentum, some sites and programs now
also offer the possibility of financial aid, or provide other suggestions for financing the gap
year, in an apparent effort to help level the playing field in terms of economic ability to take
advantage of these options. Internet searches are also likely to discover articles by presumed
experts in the field, who seem intent on allaying concerns about taking a gap year. “Some
parents and other onlookers may still feel a knee-jerk resistance to the idea of ‘interrupting’
an education or a career to take a year out,” says one on-line article, “[b]ut those doubting
Thomases are beginning to look rather blinkered in an age that attaches great value to
flexible learning and a healthy work-life balance” (Griffith, 2012, “The Allure of the Gap
Year,” para. 4).
Formed in 2012, the American Gap Association (AGA) attempts to collect and
promote gap-year data, opportunities, and resources. The website www.americangap.org
asserts that students who take a gap year will develop in key areas – namely: “motivation,
optimism, grit, and conscientiousness.” This organization goes on to claim that students who
take a gap year will gain acceptance into better colleges, earn a higher grade point average
(GPA), and have clearer career goals than their classmates. One esteemed member of the
AGA advisory board, Robert Clagett, formerly served as the Director of Admissions at
Middlebury. A long-time proponent of gap-year experiences, Clagett has embarked on a
9
study to explore the academic success of college students who had taken a gap year, as
measured by their earned GPAs. Also serving on the AGA Board are author-researcher Karl
Haigler, and Holly Bull, president of the Center for Interim Programs, both of whom have
been vocal advocates of taking a gap year. An article in US News & World Report refers to
the research of Clagett and Haigler and Nelson as evidence that “students who take a gap
year between high school and college do better once they get to school.” (Loftus, 2014,
“How a Gap Year Can Make Students Successful,” subhead).
There is an intuitive frame of reference built into much of the consumer-oriented
material on the market today about gap-year students: time off makes sense and can help
students prepare for college. Indeed, an extra year – particularly one in which students are
responsible for their own decisions and managing the ups and downs of their experience –
may contribute to increased levels of maturity, however that may be measured. But to what
extent does the gap year provide additional insight into academic goals and objectives, and to
what extent does student performance and overall satisfaction reflect the gap year decision?
The transitional experience for first-year students entering college after a gap year
may seem inconsistent with much of the existing literature and research on delayed entrance
into college. However, because the gap-year student has taken time out of the normal
sequence, she may find that she is not instantly more prepared for the college experience, and
in fact it may be that she feels surprisingly unprepared. Anecdotal evidence suggests that a
student may go through a kind of reverse culture shock, caused by returning to a structured
educational environment (and possibly one with a residential component) after having been
very responsible for her own travel, finances, daily routine, food preparation, and other
personal needs.
10
Clearly, the time is right for extensive research into the gap year phenomenon from
many angles, building on some limited previous research, and looking more intently at the
conditions that allow high school completers to choose a gap year as a viable option. Gap
year organizations are, by and large, profit-making endeavors, and so may not appreciate
research that reveals their programs as anything but egalitarian and universally beneficial.
However, high school counselors, admissions officers, parents and high school students,
deserve to have specific findings upon which to base their important decisions.
Since most of the research to date has emerged from Australia and England, it is not
clear whether the conclusions drawn or the assumptions made will map easily onto the
experiences of gap-year students from the United States. Therefore, researchers must get to
know the American students who choose to take a gap year before going to college.
While the research literature has yet to explore this phenomenon, a number of
recently-published guidebooks offer blueprints for students considering a gap year and their
families, and these books tout a long list of benefits to the gap-year experience. “Those who
have taken a structured gap-year arrive at university refreshed and focused and they are more
likely to complete their chosen course at university,” claims the Gap-Year Guidebook
(Withers & Bosberry-Scott, 2009, p. 9). Another handbook, The Gap Year Advantage,
asserts that students gain “greater confidence and independence,” a “passion for learning,”
“perspective,” “organizational and practical skills,” and the ability to “take things in stride”
as a result of their gap-year experiences (Haigler & Nelson, 2005, p. 30). These assertions
are intrinsically related to the way a gap year is defined and conceptualized.
11
Defining the Gap-Year Phenomenon
A gap year can be defined in a number of ways. In the most general sense, a gap – or
interruption – can be planned or unplanned, intentional or unintentional, desirable or
undesirable. In many contexts, a gap may be seen as a helpful respite from a routine or
situation, and it also may be seen as an omission or weakness. Similarly, taking a gap year
has connotations that are at once positive and negative, and for students may be both
restorative and eye-opening, and at the same time jarring or disruptive. Commonly-used
definitions of a gap year center around both the amount of time and the activities involved.
Stehlik (2010) uses the definition put forward by the UK’s Department for Education
and Skills, which describes a period from 3 to 24 months during which an individual takes
time out from a formal work or education trajectory. In The Gap-Year Advantage, Haigler
and Nelson offer a less-specific length of time (“from one semester up to two years”) but
indicate that the student “takes a break from formal education to travel, volunteer, study or
work” (p. 25). Similarly, Goldrick-Rab and Han (2011) refer to “anecdotal evidence” that
students pursue gap years for purposes of travel, volunteering at home or abroad, or working
to earn money for their education.
The AGA website (http://www.americangap.org/) offers a somewhat more focused
definition of a gap year, though with a less-specific time frame, identifying the year as “[a]
structured period of time when students take a break from formal education to increase selfawareness, learn from different cultures, and experiment with possible careers.”
Indeed, gap-year students are, in essence, making a transition out – departing from the
standard educational sequence from high school to college – and then making another
transition back in. The decision to do so, however, is not always as easy as staying “on the
12
conveyor belt” from high school to college (Griffith, 2008, p. 2). Starting the first year of
college after having been off that conveyor belt, gap-year students may feel out of step with
their peers because of the time they have spent after deferring their entry. When they arrive
at college, these students bring that year of experience with them.
Taking time off before college is not as common in the U.S. as it has become in
Australia and Europe. In this country, therefore, these students are widely perceived as
“delaying” the start of their college careers, and according to several studies they would be
presumed unlikely to complete postsecondary education (Bozick & DeLuca, 2005; GoldrickRab & Han, 2011; Rowan-Kenyon, 2007), in contrast to the claims of the gap-year
organizations. Perhaps, however, the characteristics and conditions among the gap-year
student population paint a more complex picture.
Postulated Gap-Year Outcomes
Students who choose to take a gap year may take on new dimensions of responsibility
and challenge as they begin to explore an alternative to direct entry into college. The Center
for Interim Programs, one of the organizations that worked closely with Haigler and Nelson
to identify individuals for their study, promotes the gap year as a chance for meaningful
growth and personal exploration, telling students reading their website that they are “ready”
to embark on an independent experience, away from their friends and family for the first
time, adding that this is “the first time that you are exercising a substantive choice regarding
what it is that you want to do with your life, at least for twelve months.” In addition, the
website suggests that a gap year is “a rite of passage in a culture that seriously lacks this
important process of initiation for young adults (www.interimprograms.com).”
13
What does this reference to a rite of passage imply? What might be the results? A
recent New York Times column suggests that there may be both economic and personal
benefits to taking a gap year, and that most students find meaning in their gap year
experiences (Glater, 2009). Whether or not the students themselves perceive this choice to
be a means of achieving a particular advantage, the decision to take a gap year presents both
opportunities and challenges. An examination of the outcomes of gap-year is an essential
next step.
The vast majority of gap-year programs identify a number of advantages to taking a
gap year. They entice students with such phrases as “have the adventure of a lifetime,” “get
a glimpse of the real world,” “begin a lifelong education process,” and “increase your
maturity and self-esteem.” Articles in the popular media, along with some material from
college admissions offices, either subtly or explicitly support these claims. Parents, in
particular, and students themselves may worry, however, that after a gap year the student
may choose not to go back to school.
Researchers and gap-year proponents Karl Haigler and Rae Nelson have found that
by and large students who take a gap year do return to finish their education. In their recent
survey of 280 former gap-year students, Haigler and Nelson found that 90% of students
began or returned to college within a year of their gap-year experience. Their respondents
reported having become far more active learners, and also reported that they experienced
increased levels of clarity in their educational objectives as a result of their gap years.
According to Nelson, 60% of the respondents identified the gap year as important or very
important in establishing their majors and career direction. In addition, “the majority viewed
themselves as more educationally motivated than their peers,” according to Nelson (Haigler
14
& Nelson, personal communication, October 22, 2010). In their recent book highlighting the
results of their study, Haigler and Nelson assert that students enjoy greater academic success
in college. “After a gap year, 66 percent of students in our survey report taking academic
work more seriously and 24 percent answered they regarded studies “about the same” as
before a gap year,” they write (Haigler & Nelson, 2014, p. 78). They also tout a GPA of 3.1
or higher for 74% of the study’s respondents, but do not offer any context for those grades.
One additional implication of the Haigler and Nelson research, along with the
seemingly endless array of organized gap-year program websites, is that a student will
generate additional cultural capital by taking a gap year, and in particular by signing up for
one of the more structured gap-year experiences. Haigler and Nelson looked at a range of
categories and found that former gap-year students’ self-reported outcomes also included
greater self-confidence, increased ability to adapt and handle ambiguity, ability to analyze
and solve problems, clearer communications skills, and stronger ability to work with people
from diverse backgrounds (Haigler & Nelson, 2013).
A recent dissertation by Hoe about the gap year in the context of other postsecondary
delays found that students who had traveled extensively during their gap year performed well
in college, and gained important skills, as well. Such outcomes were attributed to impactful
experiences such as “confronting challenge, leaving one’s comfort zone, having new
experiences, developing relationships, having a group experience, traveling, having
unstructured time, and participating in homestays, service work, language trainings, and
outdoor adventure” (Hoe, 2014, p. 220), that might be encountered during a year of travel.
15
Perhaps these studies provide further evidence for the idea that the gap year is yet
another form of social stratification. And perhaps there is simply a great deal we do not yet
know.
While the outcomes implied by existing research may be demonstrable in the long
run, in practice the transition back into a structured educational setting immediately after
taking a gap year may not always be easy for students. The shift in students’ experience and
growth students is intertwined with their identity development. The sense of liminality felt
by students, along with the process of emerging adulthood, which will be discussed further in
Chapter Two, remind us that gap-year students may be straddling different phases of their
development and operating within different, overlapping smaller environments (or
microsystems). If the gap year allows a student to take more responsibility for his own life,
does the return to a structured educational environment pull that student back in some ways?
These complexities require and deserve further study, and once understood will be valuable
to practitioners in the field of higher education.
Overview of Research Design
Through semi-structured individual interviews, the collection of monthly responses to
written prompts, and focus groups, this study gathered data from gap-year students at three
different selective institutions in the Northeast United States. The process of data collection
began in September 2013 and concluded in February 2014, once students had completed the
fall semester and received their final grades for first-semester courses.
Although it may have been possible to collect quantitative data from schools or
individuals about the number of gap-year students over time, or to gather such measurable
16
indices as GPAs or years to completion of the degree, this study sought a deeper
understanding of the students’ experiences as they transition into the college environment.
To do so, the study consisted of a series of direct interactions with 12 gap-year students
during and after their first semester of college, since qualitative researchers “work in the
field, face to face with real people” (Rossman & Rallis, 2003, p. 9). Because I wanted to
capture the perspectives and experiences of first-year students who took a gap year prior to
attending college, and to learn about their stories as fully as possible, this qualitative study
used a phenomenological approach (Bogdan & Biklin, 2007; Patton, 2002; Rossman &
Rallis, 2003).
The specific details of the research design are discussed in detail in Chapter Three.
Personal Experience with the Topic
I did not take a gap year myself. I doubt, had someone suggested it to me, that as an
18-year-old I could have seen the possibilities in the idea. Today, I approached this study
with a personal interest in gap-year students, as a result of my professional career and, in
particular, my own relationships with students at Wellesley College. As the Dean of FirstYear Students, it is my responsibility to support first-year students through their academic
and personal transitions during their first year at Wellesley. During my career, I have read
about, studied, and interacted with a wide variety of students and believe I have a strong
sense of the kinds of challenges first-year students face. The core of my work is building
relationships with individual students, and through these relationships I have begun to
appreciate and understand their lives. Gap-year students I have known present a complex
and intriguing set of life stories, and these students often confide in me when they are
17
seeking to make meaning out of their college endeavors. Through these conversations, I
have developed enormous respect for, and interest in, the ways that gap-year students engage
with the college and reflect on their own experiences. My engagement with the student
participants in this study gave me an even deeper appreciation for the gap-year student
experience.
Summary
Scholarly research about gap-year students from the United States should examine the
specific outcomes that are, by both objective and self-reported measures, the direct result of a
gap-year experience. While the current study begins the conversation, this research does not
fully explore all of these aspects of gap-year student experience. For instance, it does not
attempt to quantify the numbers of students who elect a gap year, or to examine statistical
patterns of their circumstances. Moving forward, my hope is that a number of different
perspectives on the gap-year experience will emerge. This study has generated foundational
and thought-provoking concepts for additional qualitative and quantitative study, along with
in-depth research on specific aspects of these students’ lives. First, and most importantly, the
voices of gap-year students have been heard and recorded, and their experiences should be
evaluated and shared with professionals in the field of higher education.
If, indeed, gap-year students become “jolly good” college students, researchers must
make explicit the factors that allow this to be so. This study offers an opportunity to begin
the scholarly conversation.
18
CHAPTER TWO: REVIEW OF THE LITERATURE
Overview
Given the absence of substantial peer-reviewed literature about the gap year, a
thorough review of the extant literature must consider several relevant aspects of the
phenomenon. First, there is a significant body of literature that examines delayed entrance to
postsecondary education, and the gap year should be examined in the context of that
research. Next, studies of the transition to college during the first year, which are plentiful
and often look carefully at the diversity of student characteristics and experiences, are
extremely relevant to the gap-year student experience in college. And finally, the antecedent
conditions that make it possible for students to elect a gap year are related to research into the
influence of cultural capital.
This section will explore each of these interrelated bodies of literature in depth, and
then will go on to present additional literature related to the theoretical framework of my
study.
Looking at Delayed Student Entry to College
A considerable body of literature has explored the factors associated with delaying
the start of postsecondary education; however, gap-year students are typically absent from
these studies. Rather, the research on delayed entry into college focuses primarily on the
common characteristics of students to do not go directly from high school to college (Bozick
& DeLuca, 2005; Goldrick-Rab & Han, 2011; Roksa & Velez, 2012; Rowan-Kenyon, 2007).
In particular, most studies have explored familial and socioeconomic conditions that cause
19
students to delay entrance into college for one year or more. In addition to family
backgrounds and socioeconomic status, these studies also look at the social roles and
adulthood transitional behaviors that such students may play after high school, as well as
during college, and how they impact college enrollment patterns. And several studies
highlight the likelihood that students from lower socioeconomic backgrounds also lacked
sufficient academic preparation, particularly in math (Rowan-Kenyon, 2007), and had lower
standardized test scores (Bozick & DeLuca, 2005).
The 2005 report from the National Center for Education Statistics, Waiting to Attend
College, provides extensive data to suggest that taking a year off from college makes
students significantly less likely to get a college education. According to the report, “for
whatever reasons students wait to enroll in college, those who do delay are at a considerable
risk of not completing a postsecondary credential,” and “delayed entrants begin their
postsecondary education at a relative disadvantage compared with their peers who enroll in
postsecondary education immediately after high school graduation” (Horn, Cataldi & Sikora,
p. iii). These conclusions do not appear to offer insight into the group of American students
who are likely to choose to take a gap year to travel, volunteer, or pursue an internship. In
addition, according to the data analyzed by the NCES,
Compared with students who enrolled in postsecondary education immediately after
high school graduation, delayed entrants were more likely to come from low-income
families, to be single parents, to be Black and were less likely to be White… Delayed
entrants also were more likely than immediate entrants to be Hispanic, American
Indian, to have parents who never attended postsecondary education, and to speak a
language other than English as their primary language … (p. iv)
20
The NCES report also identifies four main pursuits of high school completers who
did not go directly to college: serving in the military, getting married, starting or raising a
family, or employment. These major life pursuits, however, are less likely to reflect the
experiences of gap-year students, whose decisions to take time off after completing high
school are typically intentional.
Similarly, Roksa and Velez (2012) offered a sociological perspective on delayed
entry into college, in an effort to better understand some of the endeavors outside of
education that may contribute to the delay. For example, certain “traditional markers of
transition to adulthood” have, in the authors’ estimation, been undervalued by researchers (p.
770). This study explored the interrelationship of delayed entry, delayed completion, and life
course transitions. Social roles typically associated with adulthood – such as parenthood,
marriage, and employment – were determined to have a significant impact on the likelihood
that students will be able complete their educational goals, particularly if they have entered
into these roles prior to entering college.
In a related study, Rowan-Kenyon (2007) looked at predictors of delayed enrollment,
and discovered that those students who went directly to college after high school typically
had a higher level of parental involvement in their decisions. Using data from the National
Education Longitudinal Study: 1988–2000 (NELS), Rowan-Kenyon found that the amount of
relevant influence exerted by both school and home is typically reduced for those who delay
college enrollment, as more time elapses and other life experiences intervene. RowanKenyon’s analysis demonstrates that “there are differences in background characteristics,
academic preparation and achievement, social capital, and cultural capital based on time of
enrollment” (p. 209). For example, Rowan-Kenyon found that “(p)rivate high school
21
attendance was higher for those graduates who enrolled in college immediately (11%) than
for graduates who delayed enrollment (4%) or did not enroll (1%)” (p. 199).
Another recently-published report, The Condition of Education 2010, looked at the
rates of immediate enrollment in college by young people who had completed high school.
The results show there are persistent differences in students’ post-high school choices,
determined by such factors as household income, level of parents’ education, and race and
ethnicity. According to the report, students in lower income groups have exhibited only
slight improvements in the rate of immediate enrollment in college from 1972 to 2008,
despite gains overall in the percentage of students who enrolled in college immediately after
completing high school. Specifically, completion rates among high school graduates from
low-income families lagged behind those from high-income families by 25% in 2008 (U.S.
Department of Education, 2010, pp. vii, 36).
The choices available to applicants at six different British institutions were the subject
of a study by Reay, Davies, David, and Ball (2001). The researchers looked specifically at
“individual, peer group, familial and institutional influences and processes in choice-making”
(Reay, et al., 2001, p. 859), and also at the extent to which the students’ options were
impacted by socioeconomic class and other personal circumstances. They found that students
from different socioeconomic and racial groups experienced incongruent constraints and
opportunities when deciding whether to apply for post-secondary education. For example,
the students in lower socioeconomic groups were less likely to have had experienced prior
academic accomplishment (such as A-level grades), were more likely to need to work (which
impacted the time available for studying), and often faced transportation concerns, since the
better colleges might require traveling longer distances, with greater expense. This seems to
22
demonstrate that early conditions of disadvantage continue to result in inequity for students
after they graduate from high school.
Despite these studies, it is important to note that there may be multiple reasons that
students might choose not to go directly to college after finishing high school. Certainly,
those who are unable to go immediately to college – or to the college of their choice – due to
a set of risk factors can be said to face greater obstacles and challenges than do their
classmates who are able to go directly to college. However, such disadvantaged students
seem to have a very different profile than those who typically identify as gap-year students.
Rather, students who actively choose to delay college, particularly those of middle- or upperclass backgrounds, and especially those whose parents are college-educated, may be dealing
with a different range of choices. The nature of the delay is not consistent across these
groups.
“There is a social class gap in the gap year,” according to researchers Goldrick-Rab
and Han (2011, p. 424), who believe that the commonly-accepted profile of gap-year students
is less consistent with those of school-delayers as described in previous studies. The nature
of the delay for many gap-year students is not discussed in the earlier research, and therefore
the delayed enrollment literature does not sufficiently explain their decisions. This study
looks at the probability that such factors as socioeconomic status, academic preparation,
gender and race are predictive of delayed enrollment (Goldrick-Rab & Han, 2011). Using
the NELS data previously considered by Rowan-Kenyon (2007), this analysis focuses on the
characteristics of students who waited eight months or more after high school before starting
college. Interestingly, the study shows that what the authors describe as a “class gap” among
students who delay entrance to college is rooted directly in the students’ academic
23
preparation at the high school level, and also to their behaviors of marrying and having
children (Goldrick-Rab & Han, 2011, p. 441), which are some of the traditional markers of
transition to adulthood noted in earlier studies. In particular, “differences in course-taking
and family formation may contribute to the observed 26 percentage point gap in college
delay among students in the top 20% of the SES distribution compared to students in the
bottom 20%” (Goldrick-Rab & Han, 2011, p. 435).
Alexander, Bozick and Entwisle (2008) considered the college-going expectations
held by a group of low-income students in the Baltimore area. The study compared students
who went directly to a two-year college with students who went to a four-year college and
also those who did not attempt college within the first year after college. This analysis of
postsecondary experiences suggested that future research into college persistence should take
into account “life arenas beyond school, such as relevant aspects of family life, employment,
and, for some, military experience or contact with the criminal justice system” (p. 392).
This body of research on delayed college entry is directly relevant to the topic of gapyear students, and ties in nicely with studies examining students’ transition into college, in
addition to the literature on the cultural capital that college students possess.
The Transition to College During the First Year
Whether a student goes immediately to college after high school, or arrives there after
some delay, it is widely accepted that the first year of college is a time of significant
transition, and student adjustment to the first year of college has been studied extensively by
researchers in the field (Upcraft, Gardner, & Barefoot, 2005; Evans, Forney, & GuidoDiBrito, 1998; Christie & Dinham, 1991, Pascarella & Terenzini, 2005; Skipper, 2005). The
24
first year “is critical not only for how much students learn but also for laying the foundation
on which their subsequent academic success and persistence rest” (Reason, et al., 2006, p.
150). Overwhelmingly, the transition to college literature is based on “traditional” students
who are likely to go directly to college after graduating from high school. Nevertheless, an
exploration of the experiences of gap-year students during their first year of college must be
located within this broader body of literature.
Terenzini et al. (1994) used a series of focus groups and individual interviews to
understand adjustment to college by first-year students at a number of different institutions.
The study discussed what the authors described as the “educational portion of the American
Dream,” namely, that steady academic progress (without interruption) is commonly assumed
to be part of the blueprint for success in this country. Many of the students interviewed,
according to the researchers, had “assumed all along that going to college is what one does
after completion of high school. College was simply the next, logical, expected and desired
stage” (Terenzini, et al., 1994, p. 62). However, that set of responses contrasted with those
of first-generation students in the same study, for whom college was not simply a logical
next-step, and who therefore faced far more significant challenges as they adjusted to the
new cultures of the college environment, often without meaningful parental support. The
authors pointed to the importance of campus involvement and of validating experiences, both
in and out of the classroom, in the successful transition of students from a variety of
backgrounds.
A number of studies have attempted to identify the factors that correlate with
successful transition to college during the first year. In a study of 56 first-year college
students, Brooks and DuBois (1995) looked at both environmental factors and individual
25
characteristics that were predictive of adjustment to the first year of college, comparing
measures of adjustment. Their findings suggest that individual skills and strengths are
strongly correlated with positive adjustment of first-year students, and that environmental
variables have a lesser but measurable impact. Another study by Mooney, Sherman and
LoPresto (1991) found a positive correlation between such factors as high self-esteem and
strong academic locus of control with effective adjustment to college among first-year
students. This study was based on a sample of 88 female students from one college, and
utilized a series of self-reporting instruments to evaluate both the factors and the outcomes.
While the actual distance a student’s college was from home did not necessarily affect
adjustment during the first year, her perception about that distance did have an impact
(Mooney, et al., 1991). These two studies support the need for further research regarding the
adjustment of gap-year students, as an important subpopulation among first-years, as it has
been suggested that “different kinds of students may react differently to selected college
experiences during their first year” (Pascarella, et al., 2004, p. 254).
Indeed, the process of becoming acculturated during the first year of college is a
recurring theme in the literature. In their study of first-year college students, Smith et al.
(2006) explored the ongoing processes of socialization and the forms of discourse that play
central roles as students adapt to their new environments. This qualitative study involved a
series of interviews, focus groups, and shadowing observations of 112 first-year student
participants at a large university. In their discussion of students’ social development during
the first year of college, the authors identify a tension between “separateness” and
connectedness,” which they call “in(ter)dependence” (Smith, et al., 2006, p. 86). During the
first year, the findings suggest, students appreciate the chance to make independent choices,
26
and at the same time are reliant upon networks of support as they negotiate both academic
and social challenges. “The tension between independence and interdependence,” the
authors state, “was very apparent in students’ explanations of how they (re)established their
identity when transitioning through the first year” (Smith, et al., 2006, p. 94). Their
discussion of the process of socialization that occurs during the first year of college
highlights the concomitant student needs to define a sense of self and cultivate supportive
relationships with others. This work is resonant of Arnett’s research on emerging adulthood
(Arnett, 2004, 2007), discussed in greater detail below, which proposes that modern young
adulthood is marked by ambivalence and indecision, commonly stemming from a confusing
confluence of freedom and responsibility.
Making a successful transition may also be related to student expectations. Kuh
(2005) uses the results of two questionnaires to examine the expectations and experiences of
students during their first year of college, and to ascertain how different factors impacted
their levels of engagement. He points out that “what students expect shapes their behavior,
which in turn affects their academic performance and social adjustment to college life”
(Kuh, 2005, p. 88).
While not looking specifically at college students’ adjustment, O’Connor, et al.
(2011) examined adolescents in Australia to better understand what factors are predictive of
positive development during the emerging adulthood. Waves of survey data were collected
over 27 years, and the participants were parents, teachers, nurses, and eventually adolescents
(who began as infants, and were aged 19-20 at the conclusion of the study). Based on work
of several other researchers, this study relied on a model of five domains of positive
psychosocial development: social competence, life satisfaction, trust, tolerance of others,
27
and civic engagement. The authors noted that social relationships are an influential factor in
adolescent development, noting that relevant studies ”emphasize the importance of
interactions between the individual and their social context, highlighting the relevance of
strong relationships with others for successful development” (O’Connor, et al., 2011, p.
863). Their analysis of the 13 waves of survey data yielded their conclusions that positive
development during emerging adulthood could be predicted by such factors as strong
relationships with both peers and parents, engagement in the community, and higher
socioeconomic status.
Another group of studies placed greater emphasis on the environmental and social
factors that contribute to the transition of first-year students. In a comparison of the
experiences of students who persisted in college with those who withdrew after the first year,
Wilcox et al. (2005) considered the way that levels of social support and social integration
impacted these students’ decisions. When they arrived at the university, these 22 students
reported a desire to establish themselves socially: “in this transitional phase students have an
urgent need to belong, to identify with others, to find a safe place and to negotiate their new
identities as university students…” (Wilcox, et al., 2005, p. 713). As students developed
meaningful friendships during the first year, they gradually reduced their reliance on support
from family. On campus, the students typically found the greatest level of social support
with students in their residence halls. While social integration was a stronger determinant of
student satisfaction than was academic integration, engagement with the academic
experience also provided an opportunity for students to feel supported by advisors at the
university.
28
Holmbeck and Wandrei (1993) also considered the adjustment of college students
during the first year, assessing 286 first-year students on such factors and family
cohesiveness, attachment to parents, self-esteem and social support. Through a series of selfreported questionnaire responses, this study concluded that both men and women adjusted
positively to college if they had strong relationships with their family members (Holmbeck &
Wandrei, 1993, p. 77). Not surprisingly, high levels of adaptability to change were
correlated with a comfortable adjustment during the first year of college. According to this
study, males who had more difficulty adjusting were those who lacked strong social support,
while females who struggled with the transition were more likely to have experienced some
separation anxiety.
In a study focused on the concept of thriving during the first year, Nelson and Vetter
(2012) analyzed 908 student responses to a questionnaire that assesses the “Thriving
Quotient.” This study performed six different regression analyses to identify the factors most
clearly predictive of student thriving during the first year of college. According to the
authors, thriving students tend to perform well academically, have clear intentions to
graduate, and express feeling positive about their choice of institution (Nelson & Vetter,
2012, p. 45). Three predictive factors emerged from their analysis: educational aspirations,
campus involvement, and feeling a sense of community. The results allowed the authors to
provide a road map for higher education practitioners who want to support thriving on their
campuses.
A study by Bowman (2010) looked at the psychological well-being of first-year
college students, using data from the national Wabash Study of Liberal Arts Education.
Using a scale developed by Ryff, Bowman looked at six dimensions of psychological well-
29
being based on such psychological theories as self-actualization and individuation. The
researchers examined student responses for evidence of (a) autonomous functioning and
decision making, (b) mastery of one’s environment, (c) seeking opportunities for personal
growth, (d) maintaining positive relations with others, (e) having a sense of purpose in life,
and (f) accepting and thinking positively about oneself (Bowman, 2010, p. 180). The results
suggest that all six dimensions of psychological well-being [PWB] during the first year are
influenced both by the student’s prior experiences and by the college environment. In
particular, “even when controlling for a host of college experiences, PWB gains during the
first year are positively related to several pre-college attributes, including being a non-firstgeneration student, female, being older than the traditional college age, and having high
academic achievement” (p. 193). This underscores the need to explore the pre-college
conditions and in-college experiences of gap-year students, to determine the factors that both
enhance and inhibit their first-year experience.
Clark (2005) sought to explore the strategies that students use to negotiate the first
college year, and conducted interviews with eight second-semester first-year students at a
public urban college to learn more about their experiences. The findings suggest that
students were adept at creating strategies to address the challenges they faced during their
first year. They devised strategies in response to four different categories of situations they
encountered: overcoming obstacles, seizing opportunity, adapting to change, or pursuing a
goal. Because students were faced with different constellations of challenges, success “often
meant devising multiple strategies, which linked to form intricate webs of interrelated
decisions and behaviors, incorporating internal and external influences” (Clark, 2005, p.
30
307). While the group of participants was small, this study highlights the interrelationship of
personal circumstances, student behaviors, and the college environment.
In another examination into the transition to college, Reynolds and Weigand (2010)
explored the resilience, motivation, and self-efficacy of first year students. This study
surveyed undergraduate students who were enrolled in a one credit first-year experience
course, and analyzed their responses to four different instruments designed to measure
academic motivation, college self-efficacy, and perceptions about the college environment.
According to their findings, students who became academically and socially engaged on
campus were more likely to cope with the challenges they face. However, students with high
levels of engagement were not necessarily found to have higher GPAs during their first
semester, contradicting the expectation that they would display higher levels of academic
achievement than other students. In their discussion, the authors caution that using “such a
short-term indicator as first-semester GPA” (Reynolds & Weigand, 2010, p. 187) as a single
measure of academic achievement may have confounded the results. In terms of selfefficacy, the authors concluded that “[w]hen first-year students feel out of control concerning
their academic possibilities, they are more negative about the future and their ability to
succeed” (Reynolds & Weigand, 2010, p. 188). Notably, the results indicate that internallymotivated students appear to have greater tolerance for the obstacles they encounter during
the transition to college.
Palmer et al. (2009) looked at student transitions into college life through the lens of
the concept of “in-between-ness,” or liminality, which describes the transition an individual
experiences when moving between one place (or set of experiences) and another, and they
suggest that new students are at the “threshold” between their former and new environments,
31
and therefore may feel that they lack a sense of place or belonging (Palmer, et al., 2009, p.
38). Their research looked at the turning points that students encountered and how these
were associated with feelings of both inclusion and exclusion as new college students. While
most students feel a sense of disequilibrium in the process of making this transition, gap-year
students may be considered as having a prolonged experience of standing at the threshold.
The turning points in their lives are multiple and complex, and therefore worthy of
exploration.
Palmer’s work on liminality is also consonant with Tinto’s seminal work on student
persistence in college. Although Tinto’s research focuses primarily on behaviors and
conditions leading to college student departure and attrition, his theories are often used to
consider the conditions that support student persistence and retention. In describing the
processes of integration into the college environment, Tinto talks about the need for students
to “separate from past associations” as they transition into college (Tinto, 1975, 1987). How
might this transition be different for gap-year students, who have gone through such a
separation during the intervening year between high school and college? For example,
students may encounter isolation or incongruence when the college environment does not
match or meet their needs (Tinto, 2003). Gap-year students seeking community find
themselves straddling several different systems, and like most students, their “intentions and
commitments are subsequently modified and reformulated on a continuing basis” through
their experiences within and outside the academic institution (Pascarella & Terenzini, 2005,
p. 54).
This sense of liminality is also reflected in Arnett’s descriptions of “Emerging
Adulthood,” which he describes as an “age of feeling in-between” (Arnett, 2004, p. 14),
32
during which individuals begin to become more self-sufficient and gain both additional
responsibility and greater freedoms. Arnett explains that the criteria that young people might
use to determine whether they feel they have reached adulthood — those of responsibility,
independent decision-making, and financial independence “are gradual, so their feeling of
becoming an adult is gradual, too” (Arnett, 2004, p.15). Varying degrees of self-sufficiency
and independence are impacted by the life roles that emerging adults embrace. In fact,
Arnett contends that “the sense of being in-between occurs when emerging adults continue to
rely on their parents in some ways, so that their movement toward self-sufficiency is
incomplete” (Arnett, 2004, p. 217). It might be said that gap-year students have begun the
gradual process of approaching adulthood if one or more of these criteria describes their
experience during the year, and that when they begin college, they may relinquish some of
the independence they had enjoyed.
When they arrive at college as first-year students, gap-year students are likely to be
one year older than -- and in many cases seem qualitatively different from -- traditional firstyear students in their class. They may, indeed, appear to be better equipped to handle the
adjustment to the college experience during their first year. Gap-year students, in contrast to
other students whose circumstances prevent their immediate access to college, seem to be a
somewhat more privileged group, whose goals for an interim year between high school and
college are linked to their broader educational and personal objectives.
Cultural Capital and the Decision to Elect a Gap Year
The work of these researchers naturally leads to further questions about the factors
that set gap-year students apart from their peers. To what extent, for example, do personal
33
circumstances connect to the opportunities and experiences of gap-year students? What are
the common antecedents of a gap-year decision? There may be several interrelated answers
to these questions, and the work of sociologist Pierre Bourdieu helps to elucidate the
complex interplay of life experience and post-secondary opportunities. In Forms of Capital,
Bourdieu talks about the ways in which human interactions are constrained by the interplay
of rules, actions, and societal practices. The forms of capital he describes are the driving
force that Bourdieu says is at the core of the “immanent structures of the social world”
(Bourdieu, 1986, p. 242).
In drawing the distinctions between the forms of capital, Bourdieu explains that
economic capital refers specifically to elements of status (or societal rank) and material
possession that can be converted directly into financial success. Cultural capital describes
access to cultural resources such as viewing art or attending concerts, and may be related to
economic capital through such possessions as academic credentials. And finally, Bourdieu
talks about social capital, which describes personal and social connections and conditions
that may also lead to economic capital. Not all members of society have the same access to
the three forms of capital, cautions Bourdieu. According to Swartz, “Bourdieu points to an
unequal distribution of cultural capital. Social classes differ greatly in levels of educational
attainment and patterns of cultural consumption (Swartz, 1997, p. 198).” Bourdieu’s focus
on education and opportunity helps to elucidate his perspectives on the unequal distribution
of capital. For example, Bourdieu describes the “embodied” state of cultural capital as being
significantly influenced by one’s social class, family composition, and historical context. His
work suggests that the conditions that privilege certain students clearly disadvantage others,
and appear to replicate the existing inequalities in society.
34
Annette Lareau’s research echoes these themes from the work of Bourdieu. She
establishes that the level of educational or economic aspiration an individual high school
student may have is likely to vary greatly depending upon the student’s circumstances and
life experiences. Lareau talks specifically about cultivated capital – namely, the form of
cultural capital that can be acquired or enhanced with intentional effort (Lareau, 2003).
Similarly, according to Swartz, children’s aspirations are structurally determined based upon
the internalized cultural subculture, or habitus, that Bourdieu describes (Swartz, 1997, p.
197).
Bourdieu’s notion of habitus, and Lareau’s notion of social location, both attempt to
describe the context within which a young person develops and experiences the world.
Lareau talks specifically about parenting styles that differ by social class: “concerted
cultivation” – in which middle-class (mostly) parents take an active interest in their
children’s growth and development, planning their afterschool activities and developing their
skills and talents; and “accomplishment of natural growth” – in which lower SES families
allow for the child’s natural skills and talents to develop as long as their basic needs are
provided for and they are given time to figure things out on their own. She describes the
children in these scripted, over-scheduled middle class families as “exhausted,” with
schedules of rehearsals, games and practices that are disruptive to family routines such as
family dinner. In contrast, the children in the working class families she studied had
considerably more free time, did not encounter boredom, and had “boundless energy”
(Lareau, 2003, p. 242).
Coleman (1988) relates social capital to the actions of individuals, and describes the
ties between and among members of a community. Social capital, as Coleman describes it, is
35
one of three factors that comprise what is commonly referred to as “family background,” and
also connects with financial capital and human capital. He describes qualities of a
community that lead to levels of social capital, including trustworthiness, obligations to one
another, and both economic and non-economic outcomes. Social capital, then, is related to
power and influence, to access to information, and to the options available to particular
groups of students.
Young people who complete high school successfully may encounter a range of
options and opportunities, and it is evident that this range may be bounded by the levels of
capital – economic, cultural, and social – to which a student has had access. In their study of
high school students’ expectations about completing a four-year college degree, Johnson and
Reynolds (2013) found that educational expectations were shaped significantly by
socioeconomic status, and that “those who lived in a two-parent family where at least one
parent had a graduate/professional degree were the most likely to hold high stable
expectations to earn a bachelor’s degree” (Johnson & Reynolds, 2013, p. 825).
Family background, habitus or social location, and social or community support,
while somewhat difficult to define, are among the factors that determine what choices are
available to a high school graduate. This is related, of course, to the research on delay of
college entrance, reviewed above, and leads us to consider the connection between these
factors and the growing popularity of the gap year.
Researching the Gap-Year Phenomenon
Very little of the research looking specifically at the gap year as the explanation for a
delay in the start of a student’s post-secondary education has been conducted in the United
36
States. A number of existing studies do consider the conditions that allow students to decide
to take a gap year before going to college, and several touch on economic advantage and
cultural or social capital as salient factors.
In the United Kingdom and in Australia, where the gap year has been a popular
option for many years, Stehlick (2010) and others have examined the gap year trends among
young adults. Stehlick has concluded that one common feature of the gap year decision is
“that it is economically determined and limited to those who can afford it, and generally an
experience available mainly to those from socially advantaged backgrounds” (Stehlick, 2010,
p. 367).
Another British researcher, Heath (2007), looked at recent trends among British
college students, and concluded that gap-year students “gain the edge” over traditional
students at universities and colleges in the U.K. According to Heath, the numbers of students
in England who chose to “take a year out” before attending university nearly doubled from
1994 to 2004, due in large part to the presumed benefits of doing so. Relying on studies and
articles prepared primarily by gap-year organizations, Heath described the characteristics of
gap-year students, and explored the relative popularity of certain chosen gap-year
experiences. She was careful to point out that “in the absence of much existing academic
research on the gap year, many of the claims of the gap-year industry concerning the
presumed benefits of taking a year out are based on perceptions rather than on solid
evidence” (Heath, 2007, p.100). Although she compellingly suggests that taking a gap year
further stratifies privileged students from those less privileged, this article does not provide
any studies of sample populations of gap-year students.
37
A number of researchers have studied the choices that high school students make in
terms of how their personal experiences, socioeconomic class, and/or family involvement
impacts the opportunities available to them. Some studies have explicitly considered the
notion of “cultural capital” in relation to these choices.
One such example is Amaury Nora’s 2004 study, which explores the access,
transition, and persistence in college of a group of Latina students. In this study, Nora
developed survey questions designed to explore “the underlying dimensionalities of the
psychosocial constructs of habitus and cultural capital” in the students’ experiences (Nora,
2004, p. 184). The results appear to indicate that such variables as family encouragement,
approval from others, early precollege influences, and family expectations are predictors of
student satisfaction in college. The findings also suggest that psychosocial factors may be
more relevant predictors of college choice during the final stages of decision-making than
other significant preparatory factors, such as prior academic performance, academic interests,
and scores on standardized tests. Nora suggests that these conditions further predict the
persistence of minority students, in particular, once they begin attending the college of their
choice.
Another study by Leese (2010) looks at the transition of British students during their
first year of university. In light of increasing diversity among college student populations,
this study attempts to demonstrate the factors that may lead to increased isolation or hardship
for new university students, especially if their experience “does not fit with the dominant
discourse within the university” (p. 243). More than 70% of the students who participated
were working off-campus in addition to studying, and many found it difficult to adjust to the
expectations of the institution. Leese recognizes the need for particular support during the
38
“critical first semester,” and for awareness of how institutional practices may not be sensitive
enough to students from working-class backgrounds.
By contrast, it also may be a dimension of cultural capital that propels gap-year
students from their high school into the gap year and then on to the first year of college. One
mention in the New York Times proposes that a gap year interrupts an otherwise inevitable
“‘cradle to college to cubicle to cemetery cycle’” (Ruiz, 2011, para. 16). This implies that
one component of the phenomenon of the post-high school gap year is the feeling of
exhaustion that middle and upper-class students feel after a childhood filled with
“cultivation” of their skills and talents, as suggested by Lareau’s research. If such students
do not feel ready to continue on with their schooling immediately after high school, it may be
less because they are uninterested in learning or furthering their education, and more because
they are motivated to experience and learn from a more unscripted life.
Motivation may be a significant factor in a student’s desire to pursue further
education, or to take time off. A recent study by Martin (2010) looks at the gap year in
Australia through a psychosocial lens. Specifically, the author was looking at motivation and
high school performance as predictors of decision to take a gap year. There is prior research,
he explains, that suggests that “school leavers” lack motivation and performed poorly in high
school. He cites prior articles that specifically focus on the gap year and which consider who
has the choice in these situations. Martin concludes that taking a gap year may “resolve
motivational deficits” (Martin, 2010, p. 570), and in many cases helps to improve academic
performance at the university level. The “deficits” that Martin considers seem inextricably
linked to the pre-college conditions that impact the choices available to students.
39
Few peer-reviewed studies attempt to understand or define the ways that taking a gap
year has an impact on the students themselves once they begin the first year in college. As
described in Chapter One, the existing research has been sponsored largely by consultants or
organizations that promote gap-year programs, attempting to capture self-reported outcomes
of students’ gap-year experiences.
In one independent study, O’Shea (2011) examined the educational value of taking a
gap year focused on volunteering, focusing primarily on programs designed by a prominent
gap-year organization in the United Kingdom. Through this particular program, students are
placed into international settings where they perform volunteer duties in rural communities
for 12 months prior to entrance into a British university. Notably, O’Shea found that a year
of volunteering overseas before attending college resulted in tremendous psychosocial
development, and that “the gap-year experience accelerated this development by presenting
challenges in unique environments to the learner” (O’Shea, 2011, p. 575). Students reported
feeling that they were better at making decisions, more open to different cultures and
perspectives, and had a greater appreciation for family and community as a result of their gap
years. While the study did not go into great detail about the specific impact that these
developmental gains had on their transition to college, some students are identified as having
“difficulties adjusting to academic and social life at university” (O’Shea, 2011, p. 572).
Another study by Birch and Miller (2007) looked at Australian gap-year students to
understand both the antecedents to their decisions and the academic outcomes in terms of
grades once they reach the university. The study analyzed available data about students’
scores on entrance exams and grades, characteristics such as gender, languages spoken at
home, family composition, high school attendance, and socioeconomic status. Using a series
40
of statistical equations modeled on the factors they considered, the authors ran several
analyses to draw conclusions about motivation to take a gap year and student academic
performance after the gap year. Among their findings, Birch and Miller conclude that, in
light of their analysis, “it is possible to suggest that taking a 1-year break between high
school and university for travel or work appears to motivate students for study when they
commence university” (Birch & Miller, 2007, p. 341).
Conditions Supporting the Proliferation of Gap-Year Programs
With the persistent popularity of the gap year in the United Kingdom, and its growing
appeal in the United States, the industry of gap-year organizations has grown appreciably in
recent years. Despite the paucity of conclusive research, gap-year promoters state
definitively that their programs have measurable outcomes. Therefore, it is relevant to
explore the conditions in place that support this expanded landscape of available programs.
As previously described, family support is a favorable condition for high school
students who are interested in pursuing a gap year. In making a determination about delaying
the start of college, students considering taking a gap year are focused on the options that
seem financially and logistically viable, influenced by the emphases placed on certain
decisions by the school and family, and steered by the perceived inevitability of attending
college after the gap year.
Perhaps, in part, organized gap-year programs have met with such success because
they bridge the gap between students’ need to stop out and parents’ need to continue their
conscientious cultivation. In essence, this is a way of scripting the unscripted year -- filling
the “gap” in a way that is consistent with the parents’ approach. This allows the student to
41
identify an opportunity that does not differ so far from his parents’ goals for him, but still
stretch the opportunity for natural growth, something that he may consciously or
subconsciously feel has been lacking in his life.
Establishing gap year options that satisfy both the student and the parents is a brilliant
plan from a marketing standpoint – and the more these programs can legitimize their
outcomes and demonstrate their purpose, the more attractive these will be to such families.
Most of the programs are, after all, profit-making organizations despite what might be
legitimate and supportable educational objectives. There exists now a thriving marketplace of
gap-year experiences, offering a wide array of working, volunteering, teaching, traveling,
studying, language immersion, outdoor adventures, and personal exploration. This
marketplace appears to be targeted toward, and available to, a very narrow group of young
people and high school communities, and do not appear to be intended for families who are
likely to lack cultural capital or occupy lower socioeconomic strata.
Indeed, in families where cultural, social or economic capital is lacking, these gapyear programs are likely to seem less attractive because they require an additional investment
– of time, money and effort – that only serves to delay the acquisition of a degree. Children
in such families who have succeeded and are supported in their desire to go to college,
particularly if the parents did not, may be more eager to go directly to college and begin to
prove themselves intellectually. A college degree, of course, would eventually lead to an
increase in capital for that student and family.
Appealing to the sensibilities and concerns of students and parents may be a goal of
the gap-year programs. What other conditions appear to support the growth of this industry?
42
Although this question has not been studied, our collective experience with the current
landscape of secondary and higher education offers some possible insights.
First, with the rising costs associated with college attendance, students want to be
absolutely certain that they are ready for higher education. Add to that the mounting pressure
of the college search and application process, including increased emphasis on standardized
test scores and evidence of extracurricular involvement during high school, and it is not
surprising that young people may find themselves exhausted and needing a break before
pursuing a college degree. Next, high schools have an increased emphasis on community
service, heightening students’ awareness of societal issues they might address during a gap
year of volunteering or interning. In addition, a number of colleges and universities have
begun to mandate a gap year or gap semester for some students (Middlebury College and
Harvard, among others), so that more students find themselves exploring their options.
Our increased global connectivity, made possible through electronic media ranging
from basic live television to cutting-edge social media tools, has become a platform for
exchange of information across the country and the world. Blogs and websites are used to
transmit stories about students’ gap-year experiences, and increase the intrigue of a gap year.
Technology also has produced an impetus for greater understanding and awareness across
geographic and cultural divides, not the least of which is the globalization of higher
education, supporting the notion of incorporating international travel into a gap-year plan.
All of these conditions have begun to make gap years less unusual and more accessible.
Hence, gap-year programs have a broad foundation upon which to expand and flourish.
43
Theoretical Framework
A study of the gap-year phenomenon might approach analysis using any number of
theoretical lenses. In light of the present study’s research questions, along with the relevant
research literature reviewed above, the central underlying themes regarding gap-year students
relate to their growth and development. Therefore, a number of theoretical frames are
applicable to this study. Several in particular connect most directly to the liminality and
development that gap-year students experience during the first year of college. This section
will review Bronfenbrenner’s Ecology Model, Baxter Magolda’s Self-Authorship Model, and
indices of Relational Health, studied by Miller, Liang and others.
Bronfenbrenner’s Ecology Model
An examination of the lives of gap-year students can be understood through the
theoretical lens of Urie Bronfenbrenner’s ecology model, which describes a set of nested
layers – or systems – of human experience. Because students learn about themselves and the
world around them through their interactions with others, and through the spheres in which
they live and develop, Bronfenbrenner’s Process-Person-Context-Time model is a useful
frame for understanding first-year student experience. The interactions that occur between
individuals and their immediate environments (affected by more distant environments) are
called proximal processes (Bronfenbrenner, 1993). Bronfenbrenner refers to proximal
processes as “enduring patterns of interaction between the person and his or her immediate
environment” (Bronfenbrenner, 2005, 633).
In his model, Bronfenbrenner (1993) defined the spheres of interaction between an
individual and his environment by describing them as interconnected, or nested, systems: the
44
microsystem (or the closest system to the individual, such as a family or peer group); the
mesosystem (what Bronfenbrenner describes as the “linkages and processes” that occur
among the microsystems of an individual); the exosystem (the systems outside the
microsystem, which may include school or work environments); and the macrosystem (the
broadest context, describing such areas as culture or historical circumstances). In later
iterations of his research (2005), Bronfenbrenner added the concept of the chronosystem,
which is an overlay of time that connects the individual to the interconnected systems. The
concept of time, in fact, seemed particularly relevant to the present research because of the
interruption that a gap year presents to a students’ “cradle to college to cubicle to cemetery”
cycle (Ruiz, 2011), and for the way this chronosystem sets them apart from many of their
peers. “The accumulation of life experiences over time is a lasting effect of the
chronosystem on the individual, and students arrive at college with unique characteristics
shaped by common social forces and by individual experiences” (Renn & Arnold, 2003, page
273).
In their examination of the impact of peer culture on college student development,
Renn and Arnold (2003) provided a persuasive argument that the ecology model can be used
to help explain students’ development in college. “A major tenet of Bronfenbrenner’s model
holds that in order for development to occur, the individual must engage in increasingly
complex actions and tasks” (Renn & Arnold, 2003, page 267). In understanding this model,
it is important to consider Bronfenbrenner’s concept of developmentally-instigative
characteristics, which “influence how an individual will experience an environment and how
the environment will respond to that individual” (Evans, et al., 2010, p. 162). Specifically,
gap-year students may possess some developmentally-instigative characteristics that helped
45
lead to their decision to take a gap year in the first place, and may continue to impact their
interactions and decisions when they arrive at college.
Bryan and Simmons (2009) used Bronfenbrenner’s model in their examination of
first-generation students at Appalachian Kentucky University. In their qualitative analysis of
a series of interviews with ten first-generation students, the researchers concluded that the
students were influenced by their immediate family culture, and also by their mesosystems
and exosystems. Since their parents had not attended college, their ability to influence the
students’ decisions, or even understand the decisions they faced, was limited. The authors
concluded that “it is important to acknowledge these multiple layers of influence as they
forge ahead, making decisions about their lives and careers” (Bryan & Simmons, 2009, p.
404). While the socioeoconomic situations of these Appalachian students were markedly
different than is likely to be evident among most gap-year students, this ecological
framework is nevertheless similarly relevant.
Although they did not claim to rely on the PPCT model, Reason, et al. (2006)
considered a variety of cultures and experiences as influential in students’ academic
performance during the first two years of college. In fact, their narrative suggested the
overlapping systems that Bronfenbrenner described:
[S]tudents come to college with a range of demographic, personal, and academic
characteristics and experiences. These traits shape students' engagement with various
aspects of their institution, and those involvements, in turn, are shaped by a variety of
curricular, classroom, and out-of-class experiences and conditions. All of these
dynamics occur within, and are themselves shaped by, an often-over-looked fourth
domain, the institutional context, comprising an institution's organizational
46
characteristics, structures, practices, and policies, and the campus's faculty and peer
cultures and environments (Reason, et al., 2006, p. 153).
By analyzing student responses to the National Survey of Student engagement (NSSE), this
study concluded that multiple forces are at play as students gain competence during college.
The role of personal perception becomes extremely important in this theoretical
framework. Two first-year students may experience the same event or occurrence in very
different ways, and the PPCT model provides guidance to illustrate how each of their stories
during college is impacted by their micro, meso-, macro-, exo- and chrono-systems. The
gap-year students’ own perceptions of their transition during the first year in college had the
potential to provide very rich data. As the findings will show in Chapters Four, Five and Six,
greater complexity in experience during the gap year caused participants to develop into
more self-authored college students.
Baxter Magolda’s Theory of Self-Authorship
Considerable research has examined the meaning-making capacity of college
students. Marcia Baxter Magolda is at the forefront of this developmental work, basing her
theories on Kegan’s (1994) orders of consciousness, his pivotal theory exploring individual
interpretation of events and relationships. The term “self-authorship” was drawn from
Kegan’s theories, which he described as “the personal unfolding ways of organizing
experience that are not simply replaced as we grow but subsumed into more complex systems
of mind” (Kegan, 1994, p. 9).
By expanding on Kegan’s theories, Baxter Magolda has broadened the scholarly
discussion about “the process of development toward increasingly complex orders of
47
consciousness most often found among traditional-age college students (Jones & Abes, 2013,
p. 99). That is, Baxter Magolda has applied this framework to college students specifically,
tracing their meaning-making capacity through several developmental domains. Kegan
(1994) made a distinction between “independence” and “autonomy,” explaining that “the
self-authorizing capacity to ‘decide for myself’ does not also have to implicate the stylistic
preference to ‘decide by myself’” (Kegan, 1994, p. 219). In Baxter Magolda’s research,
self-authorship is portrayed as “continuous and cyclical” (Baxter Magolda & King, 2012, p.
8) and reflects the movement of students from primarily external to primarily internal
processes of meaning-making.
Baxter Magolda identified three discrete elements of meaning making, centered
around cognitive, interpersonal and interpersonal development. Over time, and as a result of
increased complexity of experience, student capacity for meaning making progresses from
reliance primarily on external influences, through a crossroads, or combination of external
and internal influences, and eventually to a reliance on beliefs that are mostly internallydefined (Baxter Magolda & King, 2012). The authors go on to explain that “[a] key aspect
of this developmental cycle is the interplay between transition (the process of differentiation)
and consolidation (the process of integration)” (Baxter Magolda & King, 2012, p. 9)
The cycles of differentiation and integration experienced by emerging adults are built
around several key questions that Baxter Magolda uses to frame the way the capacity for
meaning making leads individuals along the path to self-authorship. For example, cognitive
and/or epistemological development occurs as individuals grapple with what to believe and
why, asking the question, “How do I know?” Intrapersonal development happens as people
examine how they see themselves, seeing answers to the question, “Who Am I?” And
48
finally, interpersonal development takes place as individuals consider themselves in
relationship, exploring the question, “How do I relate to others?” (Baxter Magolda, 2004;
Baxter Magolda & King, 2012). Baxter Magolda and King make it clear that, “[I]n each
dimension, people actively construct their perspectives by interpreting their experiences”
(Baxter Magolda & King, 2012, p. 5).
It is during the process of entering and leaving what Baxter Magolda and her
colleagues have termed the “Crossroads” that a significant shift takes place. As it become
more apparent that there may be a wide range of answers to these evocative questions,
individuals at the Crossroads recognize the tension between what they have learned through
external sources and what they are starting to define for themselves. Indeed, awareness of
this dilemma is the first step in beginning to construct one’s own way of making meaning,
and cultivating one’s internal voice (Baxter Magolda, 2004; Baxter Magolda & King, 2012).
Their answers to the three pivotal questions begin to evolve, and some strongly-held
perspectives may be shed to make room for new meaning making to emerge. “It is
differentiation, after all,” wrote Kegan, “that creates the possibility of a new relationship to
that with which one was formerly fused” (Kegan, 1994, p. 222). As young people begin to
move through the Crossroads and start relying to a greater extent on their internally-defined
values and beliefs, their relationships with others also begin to change. According to Baxter
Magolda, the resulting self-authorship is “an ability to construct knowledge in a contextual
world, an ability to construct an internal identity separate from external influences, and an
ability to engage in relationships without losing one’s internal identity” (Baxter Magolda,
1999, p. 12).
49
Relational Health
According to Evans, et al. (2010), self-authorship enhances relationships. “As people
become more confident and clear about who they are, they are able to relate to others in a
more honest and open manner” (Evans, et al., 2010, p. 187). At times of transition, people
look to others to help them make sense of new and different information, a decidedly
relational approach in which individuals are focused on their sense of belonging, and on
making connections with others. It is an intensely relational process. In Baxter Magolda’s
work on self-authorship, “[t]he interpersonal domain refers to how people define their
relationships with others, specifically whether they define themselves in relation to others or
through their relationships with others” (Jones & Abes, 2013, p. 99). Therefore, in studying
the transition of gap-year students into the college environment, I paid particular attention to
the ways the students negotiated the transition through the formation and reconfiguration of
their relationships.
Relational-cultural theory, developed by Miller, Jordan and others at the Wellesley
Centers for Women (Jordan, 2008; Jordan, et al, 1991; Miller, 1986), grew out of research
into women’s psychological development, and the theory crystallizes the idea that healthy
relationships involve both cognitive (thoughts) and emotional (feelings) dimensions between
individuals. This approach began to give voice to the idea that mutuality, rather than power
imbalance, was an essential platform for connection. In relationships that foster growth,
“[e]ach person’s thoughts and feelings are in motion, and simultaneously each experiences
and knows more from the progress of that motion” (Miller, 1986, p. 4). The characteristics
of growth-fostering relationships were described by Miller as “(a) mutual engagement,
defined as mutual involvement, commitment, and sensitivity to the relationship; (b)
50
authenticity, defined as the freedom to be genuine in the relationship; (c) empowerment,
defined as the capacity for action and sense of personal strength that emerges from the
relationship; and (d) the ability to deal with conflict, defined as the ability to express, receive,
and process diversity in the relationship” (Liang, et al., 2002a). Since the concept of
relational health is based on the presence of these four growth-fostering qualities in a
relationship, Liang and her colleagues developed an instrument called the Relational Health
Index (RHI) to measure “growth fostering qualities across three domains: close friend,
mentor, and community” (Liang et al., 2007, p. 37).
When students head to college, they are likely to seek and cultivate relationships
across these three domains. Because authentic and empowering relationships must be
nurtured over time, it can be especially meaningful for a first-year student to feel a sense of
belonging in the community on campus. According to Liang’s research, “a sense of
belonging in a larger community may do more to reduce stress and feelings of loss during
school transition than connections with one close friend or mentor” (Liang, et al., 2002, p.
32). For gap-year students, the experience of belonging to the community may be heavily
influenced by their genuine interest in developing relationships with others and, as will be
discussed in Chapter Six, related to their ability to listen to their internal voices as they make
the transition.
51
CHAPTER THREE: METHODOLOGY
Overview
This qualitative study used a phenomenological approach to learn about gap-year
students’ transition to college during the first year. Qualitative methodology is known to be
an excellent technique for “studying an area in which little is known, to allow for unexpected
responses” (Arnett & Tanner, 2006, p. 326). Phenomenology allows for research of
maximum depth into a largely unstudied area of student experience, so this method has
allowed me as a researcher get to the essence of the experiences of a small group of gap-year
students during their first semester of college. According to Rossman and Rallis,
phenomenological studies seek “to understand the deep meaning of a person’s experiences
and how she articulates these experiences” (Rossman & Rallis, 2003, p. 97). To gain such
understanding, Patton explains, “one must undertake in-depth interviews with people who
have directly experienced the phenomenon of interest; that is, they have ‘lived experience’ as
opposed to secondhand experience” (Patton, 2002, p. 104).
The analysis, therefore, was both deductive – informed in particular by the theories of
Bronfenbrenner, Baxter Magolda and Liang – and inductive – emerging from the way the
students themselves told their stories and focused on what they found to be significant or
meaningful to them. Both concept mapping and periodic participant checking offered
valuable feedback to the coding process, and also allowed students to become involved in
further reflection about their experiences as gap-year students.
As introduced in Chapter One and explored in Chapter Two, the following primary
research question and sub-questions have guided this study:
52
Research Question: How do gap-year students experience the transition to college
during their first semester?
• Subquestion 1: What patterns or issues are evident in the academic, social, and
personal adjustment to college made by gap-year students?
• Subquestion 2: To what extent do gap-year students identify their own experience
during the first semester of college as different from those of traditional first-year
students?
• Subquestion 3: What are the common antecedent conditions and gap-year
experiences that shape the students’ transition to the college environment?
To gather as much of the direct experience as possible in the students’ own words, I
designed a series of instruments to enable both individual reflection and group discussion.
Through these interactions with the student participants, this design offered me the
opportunity to interpret and understand the “meaning of events and interactions to ordinary
people in particular situations” (Bogdan & Biklin, 2007, p. 25). Asking the students
themselves about their own experiences allowed me to learn about their lives as they were
living them, as a phenomenological approach invites the participants to reflect and report on
their experiences.
Through several different interviewing techniques, the participants were invited to
share reflections of their lives as college students with the researcher, allowing me “to enter
into the other person’s perspective” (Patton, 2002, p, 340) as their experiences in college
began to take shape. It was important, therefore, for me to handle the interviews with both
integrity and warmth, and to acknowledge my own biases during the process of getting to
53
know my participants. As Fontana and Frey remind us, “to learn about people we must
remember to treat them as people, and they will uncover their lives to us” (Fontana & Frey,
1994, p. 374).
Data Collection and Timeline
Table 3a below illustrates the methods of data collection, with approximate timeframes for each stage of the study. For example, individual interviews with the 12 student
participants were held at the start of the Fall semester 2013, and then again after they
completed the Fall semester and received their final grades, in February or early March 2014.
This allowed me to gather data at regular intervals, and also offered an opportunity for
cumulative reflection. Additional details about data collection are included below in Table
3b.
Student participants were sent written prompts twice during their first semester – once
each in October and December. In both instances, the students were asked to respond to the
same brief prompt (see Appendix E) using a document sent as an email attachment. They
either typed or hand-wrote their answers, added images when they felt inspired to do so, and
sent their responses back to me electronically, as a .pdf attachment.
Web-based virtual focus groups were held using Google HangoutTM and took place in
early November (see Tables 3a and 3b below). A Google HangoutTM is a live on-line chat
with multiple people, similar to a SkypeTM call. Two separate focus groups were conducted
electronically on Sunday evening, November 24.
The final interview for each participant took place in February or early March 2014,
once each of the students had begun the Spring semester, to allow the gap-year students to
54
reflect on their first college semester. This interview was in part a follow-up to the
participants’ responses during the initial interview, the written prompts, and the focus groups,
and also provided a forum to check with them on some of the initial emerging themes. Table
3a (below) offers a timeline depicting the points of data collection.
Table 3a: Sequence of Data Collection
Data	
  Source Number Description	
   Timing
Interviews	
  
(Two	
  90-­‐minute	
  
individual	
  
interviews	
  with	
  
each	
  student)
Two	
  (2) per	
  
student,	
  in	
  the
Fall	
  and	
  Spring,	
  
for	
  a	
  total	
  of	
  24	
  
interviews
In-­‐depth	
  interviews	
  with	
  four	
  first-­‐
year	
  student	
  participants	
  at	
  each	
  
of	
  three	
  different	
  institutions	
  in	
  
the	
  Northeastern	
  US
September	
  2013	
  and	
  
February	
  2014
Focus	
  Groups
(60-­‐minute	
  group	
  
discussions)
Two	
  (2)	
  groups	
  of	
  
students
Two	
  focus	
  groups	
  involving 11	
  of	
  
the	
  12	
  participants were	
  
conducted	
  during	
  the	
  Fall	
  
semester,	
  to	
  provide	
  additional	
  
data	
  and	
  to	
  improve	
  validity	
  
through	
  member	
  checking	
  
November	
  2013	
  
Written	
  responses Two	
  (2)	
  per	
  
student,	
  for	
  a	
  
total	
  of	
  24	
  written	
  
responses
Each	
  participant	
  was asked	
  to	
  
respond	
  in	
  writing	
  to	
  written	
  
prompts
Once	
  per	
  month	
  in	
  
October	
  2013	
  and	
  
December	
  2013
Table 3b: Data Collection Details
55
Institutional Sites
To recruit participants for this study, I collaborated with the Dean of Admission at
each of the three schools to solicit volunteers for the study, which allowed me to identify four
interested students on each of three campuses for a total of 12 student participants for this
study. The following information explains the rationale and strategies for identifying
participants.
The sites for this study were drawn from three different higher education institution
types in the greater Boston area: a small, private, liberal arts college; an Ivy League
university; and a technically-focused research university. In addition to their geographic
proximity to me as a researcher and to each other, these schools are all highly-selective,
nationally-known, private institutions, and all three attract a cohort of gap-year students into
the first-year class each Fall. All three schools are predominantly residential, with the
majority of undergraduates living in campus housing. Choosing these particular schools is an
example of purposive sampling, as Patton (2002) would suggest, and also reflects the fact
that I have relatively convenient access to these campuses. Choosing students from these
three institutions also allowed for maximum structural variation, which Patton reminds us
“avoids one-sidedness of representation of the topic” (Patton, 2002, p. 109), as they brought
perspectives from their different campuses to the study, in addition to their diverse
perspectives as gap-year students. I did not use my own campus as a research site.
For the purposes of this study, I used the following names for these schools (see
Appendix D for further information):
56
• Archer Polytechnical Institute (API) is a medium-sized, technically-focused
research university with about 4,500 undergraduate students, along with a
majority population of about 6,800 graduate students.
• Darcy University (DU) is a medium-sized Ivy League research university with
an undergraduate student population of about 6,500 students, along with about
2,600 graduate students in a variety of doctoral degree-granting programs.
• Satis College (SC) is a small, coeducational liberal arts college. The student
body is approximately 1,800 students, and there are no graduate programs or
graduate students on the campus.
Participants
The unit of analysis of this study was the student. Rather than attempting to survey a
large number of gap-year students, this study was limited to just 12 student participants,
following Patton’s suggestion that identifying the number of participants purposefully allows
the researcher “to select information-rich cases whose study will illuminate the questions
under study” (Patton, 2002, p. 46).
The number of participants was purposefully small, to allow for both depth and
saturation. O’Reilly and Parker (2013) examined the notion of saturation, which has been
used as an evaluative criterion of qualitative research. Because sampling is concerned with
"the richness of information" (O’Reilly & Parker, 2013, p. 192), an adequate number of
participants is related to the specific research questions and the appropriateness of the
sample. These authors argue that many researchers are confused about the meaning of
saturation, and the ways it can be applied to qualitative research. They also point to the
57
notion of transparency as an essential element in qualitative research. With these concerns in
mind, both saturation and transparency were goals of my research design.
Collaborating with the Deans of Admission on the three campuses, I invited student
participants, in an attempt to satisfy several basic criteria, including:
a) Identifying four students from each of three different institutions;
b) Working with three institutions in the same general geographic area, representing
different student body sizes and different institutional foci;
c) Including roughly an equal number of men and women;
d) Including students from each of three different kinds of hometown settings:
Urban, Suburban, and Rural;
e) Including students from each of three different kinds of high school academic
experiences: public, private, and religiously-affiliated; and
f) Ensuring representation of the widest possible range of gap-year experiences,
across all participants in the study.
These selection criteria were central to the selection of the participants because they
provided an opportunity to compare certain characteristics; I wondered as a researcher
whether there might be some differences related to a student’s high school experience, or
gender, for example. Perhaps in reviewing the data I would see some trends that seemed to
cluster around particular personal characteristics. While I hesitate to draw any clear
conclusions along these particular lines, my reflections on the group of participants will be
discussed in Chapter Seven, under limitations and implications for further research.
After receiving initial agreement from the Deans of Admission at all three
institutions, I requested a Site Permission Letter for this study from the Institutional Research
58
departments at each of the schools. My request was to be granted approval to contact
students from their database of members of the incoming Class of 2017 who had taken a gap
year after graduating from high school in Spring 2012. I asked for permission to invite the
students to participate in all three segments of the study: individual interviews, focus groups,
and responses to written prompts. In order to find four participants from each of the schools,
it was necessary to invite a larger number at the outset, to allow for some to decline the
invitation and for some attrition for other reasons. Once I had submitted the Site Permission
Letters from all three schools, the study was approved by the Institutional Review Board.
Immediately upon receiving approval from the IRB at Boston College and support
from each of the individual institutions in July 2013, I worked directly with the Admissions
staff at each school to identify and invite the students to participate. Since it would not have
been appropriate for the schools to give me access to students without their consent, I drafted
a letter (see Appendix A) that described the purpose of the study, and asked each Dean to
send the letter via email to the first-year students on campus who had elected to take a gap
year before matriculating. This allowed the schools to maintain control over their student
information, without disclosing names or contact information directly to me. Included in the
letter was a link to a brief QualtricsTM survey (see Appendix B), which interested students
were asked to complete. It is important to note here that one of the institutions in the study,
Darcy University, also admits a cohort of students annually who are required to take a year
off before starting as a first-year student; these students were excluded from this study
because the decision to take a gap year was not theirs initially. During the month of August,
these invitation letters were sent via email by the Deans of Admissions at all three schools to
59
incoming students. Students who were interested filled out the QualtricsTM survey, and I was
able to track their responses.
With initial responses from 31 interested students, I began to contact students who
expressed interest in being a part of the study. It was at this point that I made some
determinations based on gender, high school, hometown, and gap-year experiences. I wrote
to every student who responded to thank them for their interest, and then followed up
subsequently with students who would help me create a well-balance cohort.
Although I had not planned to include international students in the pool of
participants, my initial interest survey (Appendix B) was too general to allow me to identify
the internationals within the group. Based on the limited information I received in the initial
survey, I began by contacting the first two males and two females at each school. Once the
students agreed to participate according to the timeline and description I shared during our
phone conversation, I added them to the final list of participants. Indeed, once I contacted
the students by phone for a preliminary conversation about participating in the study, the
excitement in their voices (and the very interesting things they did during their gap years)
made it difficult for me to turn anyone down. And because not every student I attempted to
contact was responsive, I decided in the end to include the two international students who
had responded, and they ended up bringing additional elements of richness to the study. I
scheduled brief telephone conversations with each potential final participant, to be sure they
were fully aware of the purpose and nature of the study, and to ascertain their level of
enthusiasm. Once we agreed on the details, each student was asked to read and sign an
informed consent form (see Appendix F) before taking part in the first individual interview.
60
The 12 students who agreed to take part in the study were informed before the first
interview that they would receive incentives for their participation. The total value of these
incentives was $100 per participant. The schedule of incentives was as follows:
After initial 90-minute interview $10 Amazon giftcard (via email)
After first written response $10 Amazon giftcard (via email)
After focus group $20 Amazon giftcard (via email)
After second written response $10 Amazon giftcard (via email)
At the end of the final 90-minute interview $50 Amazon giftcard (in person)
After the initial interview, each student received a $10 Amazon gift card. After each
of the written responses, each student received another $10 gift card, which I sent
electronically to each student along with a note of appreciation. A $20 gift card was sent to
the 11 students who participated in the focus groups. When we met for the final interview,
each participant received a $50 gift card to Amazon. The funds on the cards could be applied
by the students to school supplies or books, in support of the students’ educational goals.
Research Design
In Chapter Two, I described the phenomenon of the gap-year student and the
prominence this idea has gained in the popular press during the past 20 years. Limited
research has been done in this country about gap-year students, and overall the existing
research to date has looked at certain markers (GPA, satisfaction with gap year, etc. – cite)
61
but has not delved into how these students experience the transition back into a structured
educational environment after having taking this time off. Therefore, rather than gathering
quantitative data about the numbers of gap-year students or their performance in college, or
focusing on a summary of the activities gap-year students choose to pursue during the gap
year itself, I chose a qualitative methodology for this study, with a focus on the students’ own
insights into their transition during the first college year, after having pursued a gap year. It
is through their personal stories that begin to understand how gap-year students make their
way as they adjust to the college environment, and I believe this is an important contribution
to the field.
Qualitative methodologies were used to collect, analyze, and report the findings of
this study. Collection, as detailed above, involved three means of listening to the stories that
gap-year students tell about their process of adjusting to the first year of college. To make
sense of and code the data, I used several modes of coding, as described by Strauss and
Corbin (1990). The process involved open coding, in which a researcher looks at the data to
see what themes emerge; axial coding, in which a researcher finds relationships among the
themes; and selective coding, in which a researcher focuses on certain aspects of the data,
often using a pre-determined theoretical lens. In reporting my findings, I have made a
concerted effort to retain the authentic perspectives of the participants.
The coding process was also done in stages, because during the coding process, the
initial set of theoretical frames I had been using to shape my observations (including
Bronfenbrenner’s Ecology Theory) seemed somewhat less complete than I had initially
expected. Rather, through open and axial coding, clear themes of self-authorship began to
emerge. Therefore, I returned to my data analysis after initially completing the coding
62
process, to look more specifically at the key ingredients of self-authorship as defined by
Baxter Magolda, and also to pay more careful attention to evidence of relational health, as
described in the work of Liang and others.
Data for this study were collected in three separate, but intersecting, ways: Individual
Interviews, Focus Groups, and responses to Written Prompts.
Individual Interviews
Interviews are an established primary method of gathering data in phenomenological
studies. Researchers recognize that interviews “vary in the degree to which they are
structured” (Bogdan & Biklin, 2007, p. 104). Because I was interested in comparing data
across the 12 subjects, I used the same semi-structured interview protocol with each
participant. To encourage the subjects to tell their stories and shape the discussion, I also
allowed the conversations to develop around their answers and ideas.
The individual interviews took place twice: once at the start of the Fall semester
(September-early October 2013) and then again at the start of the Spring semester (Februaryearly March 2014), and involved all 12 students. I traveled to their campuses to meet them
on their own turf, arranging to meet them in private spaces in campus buildings. Each
student was questioned one-on-one by the researcher about his or her experience as a firstyear student, in two personal, semi-structured interviews of approximately 90 minutes each.
The semi-structured interview protocols for both September and February are attached (see
Appendix A).
63
Focus Groups
Video-based focus groups with the gap-year students were held in November, when
the students had just passed the midpoint of their first semester. Bogdan and Biklin suggest
that focus groups offer qualitative researchers the chance to learn about a range of views, or
to encourage discussion around “a topic that informants might not be able to talk so
thoughtfully about in individual interviews” (Bogdan & Biklin, 2007, p. 109). Similarly,
Rosman and Rallis suggest that young adults in focus groups may “find a group setting more
conducive to talking about their lives” (Rosman & Rallis, 2003, p. 194). Student participants
in the focus groups were asked to talk about how they were adjusting as first-year students
during their first semester in college. These discussions were designed to encourage dialogue
among the student participants, and to identify some shared perceptions of their experiences
as first-year students. Coding of the data from these two focus groups generated some
themes and concepts drawn from the students’ own experience. Focus group protocols are
attached as Appendix D.
I opted to hold the focus groups using Google HangoutsTM because the students in
my study attended three different institutions, in the same geographic region but not near
each other. I also felt this approach showed respect for their very busy lives, utilizing
available technology with which students are typically quite comfortable. Participants were
informed during the planning process that implicit in their willingness to participate in the
Hangouts was an understanding that their identities would be disclosed somewhat to other
students involved in the study. For example, the students’ first names and current schools
were used during introductions, and through Google Plus they could view other participants’
email addresses. They were given the chance to opt out if they so desired.
64
While I had hoped to involve six students in each of the two focus groups, the
students’ own schedules resulted in 11 students participating: four in the first focus group,
and seven in the second one. All three schools were represented in each of the focus groups.
The Google HangoutTM technology was not glitch-free, and at times the discussion was
hampered by technological challenges such as unintentionally-muted microphones, or loss of
connectivity, which occasionally led to someone dropping out and then rejoining the
conversation. Each focus group was audio recorded.
The focus groups followed a semi-structured format, with the goals of sparking
dialogue among the participants. Once the conversations began, I encouraged the students to
ask questions of one another, and to follow threads of discussion that felt important or
interesting to them. With occasional interjections from me as the researcher, the focus
groups explored some useful themes, which will be discussed in later chapters.
Responses to Written Prompts
As noted on the timeline, in both October 2013 and December 2013, each participant
was sent by email an open-ended written prompt. The prompt was the same both times, and
participants were encouraged to spend just a few minutes crafting creative written responses
to the prompts and sending them back to the researcher electronically. The text for the
written prompts is attached as Appendix E.
Students were asked to provide written responses in hopes that these might elicit
some thoughts and reactions from participants that were different than what was shared in
individual interviews or focus groups. This method of data collection is also respectful of the
65
participants’ time (rather than asking them to take part in monthly interviews during their
entire first semester) and also was hoped to provide an added dimension of insight.
Uses of Technology
This study made use of current technology in several important ways:
1) QualtricsTM survey collected initial information from interested gap-year students.
2) Google HangoutsTM were used to create virtual focus groups while students were
on their own campuses, often in their own residence hall rooms.
3) Written prompts were sent to students electronically (as an electronic attachments);
students responded to them and returned them to the researcher as an electronic attachment.
4) Two of the final interviews were held via Google HangoutTM, because scheduling
challenges made it difficult for us to connect in person on their campuses.
5) DoodleTM polls were used to identify students’ availability for individual
interviews and Google Hangouts.
What is most significant about the technology is that it provided opportunities for
interaction that would not have otherwise been available; it enabled me as a researcher to
arrange for the collection of data without having to be physically present on three different
college campuses at five different times during the academic year. In addition, I was able to
connect with students through a platform that is familiar and comfortable to them. It
certainly did not replace or fully replicate face-to-face interactions, but served as an
important data-gathering technique. The written reflections, in particular, provided a format
for some students to express themselves differently than they might have in an interview
66
setting. They used italics or capital letters, and graphics or photos in a few instances, to
express their thoughts and feelings. The prompt, while open-ended, allowed for reflections
that were specific and genuine, coming directly from the hearts and minds of the student
participants.
The focus groups were the most challenging aspect of data collection. Because
students were on three different campuses, it would not have been realistic to expect them to
be able to get together in person on a given day. Since many students are familiar with video
chat interfaces such as SkypeTM and FaceTimeTM, looked for a way to offer a live video chat
for a group. Google HangoutTM was the best option I found — it allowed for up to ten
people to join the chat at one time. Therefore, I arranged two consecutive Google
HangoutsTM, hoping to have students equally split between the two focus groups.
Anonymity vs. Confidentiality
Guidelines for research with human subjects set important ethical principles for
treating participants in any study with dignity and respect. (Department of Health, Education,
and Welfare, 1979). At the outset of any qualitative research study, it is imperative that the
researcher inform the participants of their right to confidentiality. The informed consent
form is designed to spell out the details of the study and the ways in which the results will be
shared. The standard clause from Boston College’s Informed Consent Form indicates that
“in any sort of report we may publish, we will not include any information that will make it
possible to identify you” (see Appendix F). That is, participants will not be recognizable as
individuals in the finished manuscript.
67
Recently, however, behavioral researchers have begun to draw distinctions between
dichotomous and continuous approaches to confidentiality. Participants, says Iphofen
(2009), have the right to be identified if they want to be, and we as researchers should not
presume to protect them from their own identities. In addition, Iphofen draws a distinction
between anonymity, which is dichotomous, and confidentiality, which is a variable
dimension. With this perspective in mind, it was my obligation as a researcher “not to
compromise pre-agreed levels of confidentiality and anonymity” (Iphofen, 2009, p. 92).
My initial analysis of data from the first round of interviews taught me several things
about this tension between anonymity and confidentiality. First, I had begun to detect some
connective themes across all the participants, so decided I would need to do some participant
checking to see if these themes resonated with them. The focus groups, which would put
them in contact with one another, seemed to be an ideal chance to have the students discuss
the themes. Next, I found that the students’ stories were rich and fascinating and thick with
detail (Geertz, 1973) so I became concerned that obscuring some details would dilute the true
meaning and importance of what they had shared with me.
In the end, I collaborated with my participants to decide jointly the level of accurate
detail I should include, something short of iron-clad confidentiality. At the conclusion of the
final interview, I included the following explanation:
In the agreement you signed in the fall, I promised to obscure your identity in my
finished dissertation. It read: “The records of this study will be kept private. In any
sort of report we may publish, we will not include any information that will make it
possible to identify you.”
68
The challenge for me as a qualitative researcher is to protect the confidentiality of my
participants, but without losing the essence of their stories. I want to be able to talk
about what each of you brings to the discussion, and sometimes your particular
experiences or characteristics are quite relevant. However, your story is your story.
I don’t want to presume the level of confidentiality that you desire, so I would like to
involve you in the process of determining which facts about you will be obscured.
At this point in our conversations, I asked for their help. I had developed a
supplemental confidentiality agreement, which included a clause promising that I would not
presume to know how they felt and would share my preliminary findings with them so they
can give input or change their mind before I finalized my dissertation. Together with each
participant, we reviewed a worksheet that I had compiled, identifying some key facets of
each person’s story that he or she might feel would make that individual recognizable to
readers of the dissertation. We decided together which characteristics should be preserved
accurately, and which should be modified in some way to protect their identities. We
discussed the possibility that, if someone they know well happened to read this dissertation,
they might be able identify them based upon some of the descriptions and quotes that have
been included. I incorporated the students’ input into the way I have reported their stories,
and the level of detail I have provided in the tables and discussion in Chapters Four, Five, Six
and Seven.
In most cases, the students genuinely appreciated being asked and rarely seemed
concerned about anything they had shared with me finding its way into the finished
69
dissertation. Along with the names of the institutions, I have changed each student’s name
(most, in fact, chose their own pseudonyms) and did not specifically identify such details as
their hometown or school. In some instances, based upon the participant’s request, I have
modified other, less critical details such as number of siblings, or their home state. When I
had sufficiently revised my findings, I shared a draft of the findings with the participants and
invited their feedback. Three of the 12 participants gave me some minor feedback.
It may be seen as unconventional to invite participants to help craft the presentation
of their stories in a qualitative study. It is my hope, however, that the “gold standard” of
qualitative research will be revised to allow subjects to have a chance to give input into the
level of anonymity that researchers purport to provide. Iphofen (2011) reminded us that
“[w]e should celebrate and encourage the diversity and inventiveness one finds in qualitative
research, and the flexibility and thoughtfulness about those being studied that qualitative
researchers frequently demonstrate alongside their methodological innovations.” (Iphofen,
2011, p. 445) The willingness of participants in this study to partner with me in determining
the best way to share their stories allows me to feel confident that I have handled the data
thoughtfully and appropriately.
Analysis and Reliability
Analysis of the large volume of qualitative data from multiple interactions with my
participants required a careful approach. I gained inspiration for the qualitative content
analysis of the focus groups, written responses, and individual interviews from the work of
both Spradley (1979), whose work focused on domain and taxonomic analysis, and Glaser
and Straus (1967), who provided an explanation of grounded theory. I used Glaser and
70
Straus’s concepts of open, axial and selective coding to analyze and report my findings. This
involved a process of developing categories, identifying connections, and noticing thematic
relationships, in an effort to get to a deeper level of understanding of the data. As I generated
a coding system from the interview, focus group, and written response data, I started from an
emic perspective – that is, using the language and concepts raised by the students themselves
— to begin to organize the data into categories and themes. This allowed the students’ own
ideas to guide the process, and “[s]imilarities and convergences can be established after the
analytic core of categories has emerged” (Glaser & Straus, 1967, p. 37).
All of the student responses, including the focus group conversations, were recorded,
transcribed and loaded into HyperResearchTM, a qualitative data analysis program which
allows for coding and sorting of qualitative data. Using HyperResearchTM, I was able to code
the data based on the themes that emerged initially from the students’ words and stories (a
process of open coding, as described by Charmaz, 2005). In addition, after completing an
initial analysis based on my preliminary coding scheme, I returned to the data and did
additional coding based on some of the concepts relevant to my initial findings, relying on a
process of constant comparative analysis (Glaser & Straus, 1967) to integrate these data and
identify emerging themes. To best capture the essence of the lived experience of these
students, I also invited my participants to give me feedback on the initial codes and emergent
themes prior to finalizing the findings.
A table showing the full range of codes, along with the “clusters” that emerged after
several rounds of analysis, is included as Figure 3. Further details demonstrating how the
Gap Year Impact Model emerged from the codes and clusters is included in Appendix G.
71
Greater detail about how the coding process led to the development of the Gap Year Impact
Model will be discussed in Chapter Four.
To provide inter-rater reliability, I asked a colleague who is both a professional in the
field of higher education and a doctoral student in the Higher Education program at Boston
College to code excerpts of interviews using my initial system of codes and clusters. We then
met to compare our coding results. According to Patton (2002), a second reviewer of
qualitative coding should find that the initial coder’s categories are a good fit for the data.
The process of comparison revealed that the data, indeed, were appropriately captured by the
coding categories. In addition, perhaps because my colleague was guided by the codes and
clusters that had emerged from my process of coding, he detected with remarkable specificity
several of the sub-themes that I had identified. This helped to support the reliability of the
analysis.
During the final round of individual interviews, I asked each student participant to
react to some initial themes I had begun to identify in my review of the earlier interview,
focus group, and written response data, as a means of member-checking (Creswell & Clark,
2007; Patton, 2002). The findings described in Chapters Four, Five and Six were informed
by the students’ positive, negative, and neutral responses to those initial themes, and by my
colleague’s coding results.
Both in-depth interviewing and focus groups are qualitative research methods
carefully described by Fontana and Frey (1994). By combining these strategies with an
opportunity for participants to provide responses in writing, I avoided some of the challenges
that each of them separately may have presented. For example, a “group think” mentality
may have emerged from solely focus group discussions, so the individual interviews
72
provided comparative data. In addition, the written responses allowed participants to
document their thoughts and feelings during the course of the first semester, rather than just
at the start of the Fall semester and the start of the Spring semester. Finally, I also used part
of the final interview to review the participants’ previous comments and ask them to provide
further reflection about the themes they had heard during the focus group.
The collection of data gleaned from interviews, focus groups, and written responses
to prompts provided a triangulation that allowed me to conduct a multifaceted comparison of
the lives of this group of gap-year students. The focus groups also offered additional insight
through member checking, which helped with the depth of the coding process and supported
the overall validity of my analysis. After the initial draft of my findings chapter, I also
offered all 12 participants the opportunity to read and react to the data I had collected, which
provided a final round of member-checking before completing the final draft of this
dissertation.
As noted by Creswell and Clark (2007), validity in qualitative research rests with the
participants, which suggests that reviewing my findings with the students in my study
(member-checking) was an important aspect of analyzing the data. “In qualitative research,
the inquirer is interested in the accuracy of the final report or account. To this end, the
themes may be taken back to participants … or the researcher may use multiple sources of
information to provide evidence for a theme” (Creswell & Clark, 2007, p. 31). This
sentiment is echoed by Patton (2002), who asserted that a set of coding categories “should be
credible to the persons who provided the information which the set is presumed to
assimilate” (p. 466).
73
While it is not possible to generalize from a qualitative study (Creswell, 2007),
essentially, the value of this study was tied to my ability to enhance the way we understand
the experiences of the first-year students who participated. Maxwell (1992) offers some
helpful insights into the need to consider five levels of validity in qualitative research:
descriptive validity, interpretive validity, theoretical validity, generalizability, and evaluative
validity. Throughout the data collection and analysis, my responsibility as a researcher has
been to strive to avoid inference during the descriptive parts of my analysis [descriptive
validity]; to apply an emic approach in support of the interpretive validity of the study; to
apply a theoretical understanding that is truly applicable to the student experiences I studied
[theoretical validity]; to consider carefully any suggestion that this research is generalizable
to other students or groups of students (linking especially to existing literature on first-year
college students); and finally, to do my best to examine the results of each element of my
study in connection to the other results, as a means of better understanding the students’
experience [evaluative validity]. Overall, it has been essential for me to engage reflexively
with my research, and to acknowledge the limitations in my ability to fully eliminate any
threat to the validity of this work.
Perhaps most significantly, it has been important for me to honor the stories,
accomplishments, and challenges of each of the participants in this study. My analysis of
their experiences was done thoughtfully and with great care to maintain respect for them as
individuals, and for the personal reflections they have shared with me.
74
Figure 3: Codes to Clusters Gap!Year! Planning,! Preparation and! Feasibility Gap!year!Encounters Changing! Relationships Self=Authorship Adjusting!to!College Gap!Year!Decision! making Challenge!leads!to! growth Dating/!boyfriend/! girlfriend Important!to!Me Academic!engagement Expectations!about! going!to!college Relationships!during!the! gap!year! Developing!friendships Confidence Enthusiasm!for!school Family!influence Freedom Affinity!Groups FOMO Extracurricular!Engagement Family!support Responsibility Family!contact Relevance Opportunities!and!Encouragement? Finances Goals!for!gap!year Friendships!during!HS Self Free!Time Getting!away Independence High!School!friends Self=Efficacy Freedom Goals!for!gap!year Job/working Maintaining!Friendships Agency FOMO
Timing Nervous/worried Meeting!other!gap!year!
students
Self=Authorship Goals!for!college
High!school!background Internship Family!relationships Meaning!Making Nervous/worried
HS!Academics Travel Relationships!during!the!
gap!year
Maturity Thinking!about!the!gap!year
Advice Expectations Relationships!with!HS!
teachers
Living!in!the!Present Talking!about!the!gap!year
College!Search!Process Language Support Changes!noticed!by!others Studying/working!in!school
Reactions!to!gap!year!
idea
Real!Life Mentors Knowing!myself Noticing!distinctions!between!gappers!and!
nons
Stress!in!HS Service Social!Pressure Worldview/!perspective Courses
Sports!in!HS Sense!of!time Siblings How!I!changed Academic!performance
Social!Pressure!in!HS Contact!with!family Extended!family Goals!for!future Transition!to!college
Planning Family!support Privacy Timing
Parents’!Education Success
Stress
Social!Pressure
Sense!of!Belonging
Privilege
Relevance
Contact!with!family
College!courses
Preparing!for!college
75
CHAPTER FOUR:
SAMPLE, MODEL OVERVIEW, AND GAP YEAR ANTECEDENTS
Introduction
As previously described, a number of popular books and trade articles about gap-year
students suggest that taking a gap year helps students do better in school, or generally be
more successful, when they arrive at college. Experts promoting gap years, including Holly
Bull (2006), and Karl Haegler and Rae Nelson (2005, 2013), suggest that when gap-year
students arrive at college, they are likely to be better students, and earn better grades. A
thoughtful listener or reader might ask, “better than what?” It is unclear what benchmarks
are being used to stake this claim. As discussed in Chapter Two, some existing research
suggests that gap-year students tend to have higher GPAs than students who have not taken a
gap year, even as the studies acknowledge that there may be some confounding factors of
parents’ education and socioeconomic background (Clagett, 2013, personal communication).
This is used to further extrapolate that gap-year students arrive at college more academicallyfocused, perhaps than other students, or perhaps than they would have been if they had gone
directly to college after high school.
Despite this limited prior research, I maintain it is not possible to measure whether
gap-year students earn better grades in college than they would have if they had not taken a
gap year. As these findings will illustrate, I assert that not only is this impossible to
ascertain, but it also is not the essential question.
76
Rather, this study reveals that students who have taken a gap year arrive at college
more likely to demonstrate “Sovereign Engagement” in their experiences. In other words,
gap-year students are predisposed to begin college with a heightened sense of selfauthorship, which in turn allows them to make thoughtful and authentic choices as they
transition during the first year. In some instances, this may translate into excellent grades
and focused attention to academic work. In others, it may mean that the student is acutely
focused on his or her personal goals — which may or may not include outstanding academic
performance.
This chapter describes the findings of this study, tracing the data analysis that has led
to this conclusion and to the concept of “Sovereign Engagement.” The Gap Year Impact
Model (Figure 4) has been designed to encapsulate these results, and the next two chapters
will also review the findings about making the transition to college after having taken a gap
year.
As described in Chapter Three, these findings are the result of the collection and
analysis of qualitative data. The research question and subquestions sought to explore the
experience of 12 first-year students who had taken a gap year after high school and before
college, to pursue other interests. The students were recruited to participate from three
different New England institutions, based on their willingness to be involved in the study,
and also according to several criteria that helped to maximize the variation in the sample.
A qualitative study of this kind, which seeks to describe in detail the common and
disparate experiences of a small group of individuals, should look for specific threads of
connection among participants. Therefore, the 12 participants shared some key
characteristics, including their attendance at one of three highly-selective institutions in the
77
northeast, and their status as first-year students at the time the study began. If threads of
connection exist beyond those similarities and across a variety of experiences, I surmised,
perhaps greater insights could be drawn.
All twelve students persisted through the sequence of five study interactions, from
September 2013 through February 2014. Therefore, I had a continuity of communication
with them, and felt that I came to understand them and their stories well. Each participant
was, in her or his own ways, intelligent, introspective, personable, ambitious, and pleasant.
A table introducing the twelve students participating in the study is included below as Table
4a. A brief biographical sketch of each participant is also included as Appendix J.
Overview of the Findings
Chapters Four, Five and Six are organized by several major themes that emerged
through the analysis of the data, using the students’ own thoughts and reflections to provide
depth and richness to the findings. According to their own descriptions, gap-year students
participating in this study developed a greater sense of responsibility for their own decisions
once they arrived at their respective colleges. In these three chapters, I describe the
derivation of the “Gap Year Impact Model” from the process of coding interview, focus
group and written prompt data. These chapters also analyze the students’ processes of
deciding to take a gap year, their experiences during their gap years, and their transitions to
college during their first several months on campus.
This study found that, despite the wide variety of activities that students pursued
during their gap years, and despite their disparate personal stories, there were some common
outcomes in terms of gap year students’ adjustment to the first year of college. Most
78
significantly, gap-year students approach their first year of college with a strong propensity
toward sovereign engagement, less commonly attributable to their first-year peers.
As described earlier, this study posed a primary research question: “How do gap-year
students experience the transition to college during their first semester?”, and three important
subquestions: “What patterns or issues are evident in the academic, social, and personal
adjustment to college made by gap-year students?”; “To what extent do gap-year students
identify their own experience during the first semester of college as different from those of
traditional first-year students?”; and “What are the common antecedent conditions and gapyear experiences that shape the students’ transition to the college environment?”
To answer these questions, I conducted a thorough analysis of the five sets of
participant data collected from September 2013 through March 2014. Each student
participated in a 90-minute initial interview, submitted a written response to a written prompt
in October, participated in a virtual focus group (via Google HangoutTM) in November,
submitted a written response to a written prompt in December, and participated in a 90-
minute final interview in February or early March. In addition, I coded and analyzed all the
field notes and research journals that I had produced during this six-month period.
The Gap Year Impact Model grew out of careful analysis of the initial raw data.
Coded data from interviews, focus groups, and written responses to prompts was grouped
into categories, or clusters, of similar themes. A more detailed description of the process of
coding the data is included in Chapter Three, including a table (Figure 3) showing the full
range of codes, along with the clusters that emerged after several rounds of analysis. For
example, descriptions of the range of activities that comprised the students’ gap-year
experiences, including their reflections on what was significant or important about those
79
experiences, were grouped together into a category called “Gap Year Encounters.” As it
became more clear that these encounters were the source of developmental growth, these
stories of encounters formed the basis of the “Encounter” portion of the Gap Year Impact
Model. For further clarity, Appendix G shows the way these clusters eventually became
discrete elements of the Model, including sample comments from the participants that
demonstrate the way the Gap Year Impact Model emerged from the clusters.

80
Table 4a: Gap Year Study Participants Gap$Year$Study$Participants Name Gender School* Hometown High%%school%type Gap%year%activities Andy M API Urban"PA Private Worked"for"a"small"start7up"tech"company"in"Silicon"Valley Daniel M API Suburban"MA Religious Studied"at"a"Yeshiva"in"Israel Jackie% F DU Rural"NJ Private"boarding Lived"and"took"classes"in"Europe,"attended"cooking"school,"WWOOFinga, learned"to"sail Julie F DU Urban"CA Public Worked"two"minimum"wage"jobs,"lived"in"Turkey"and"attended"school" there Layla F SC Urban"NY Private Interned"at"a"non7profit,"lived"and"volunteered"in"India
Lena F DU Suburban"PA Public Taught"in"an"urban"middle"school"through"City"Year"
Maria F API Rural"WV Public,"affiliated"with"
local"university
Worked"two"minimum"wage"jobs,"traveled"to"South"America"to"learn"
Spanish"and"do"research
Mark M SC Suburban"NY Public Went"on"a"NOLSb mountaineering"trip,"studied"music,"trained"for"
athletics
Paulina F SC Urban"Latin"America Private Volunteered,"took"post7high"school"classes,"interned"in"medicine"and"
business
Peter M DU Urban"Europe Private"international"
school
Worked,"traveled,"spent"time"at"home"and"volunteered"abroad
Tessa F API Urban"NY Religious Tutored"through"national"service"program"in"Israel
Vinny M SC Suburban"AZ Public Trained"for"athletics,"researched"at"local"med"center,"hiked"
Note. School names are pseudonyms (see Chapter 3). DU = Darcy University, an Ivy-League university in the northeast US; SC =
Satis College, a small liberal arts college in the northeast US; API = Archer Polytechnical Institute, a technological research university
in the northeast US
a World Wide Opportunities on Organic Farms
b National Outdoor Leadership School
81
Study Participants
Before meeting with the student participants in person, I had begun to gather
information about them that became the foundation for my familiarity with them and their
stories. Through the initial survey they had completed, I knew their names, their genders,
their birthdates, and the kinds of high schools they had attended. I had also asked briefly
about the activities they had engaged in during their gap years, which allowed me to select
participants who represented the widest possible range of experiences. I also spoke with
each student by phone before confirming their participation.
During our initial interviews, the participants were encouraged to explain the whowhat-where-when-why of each component of the year. Specifically, I wanted to hear them
talk about the decisions they had made, the people with whom they had spent their time, the
things they had learned, the ways in which they had stayed connected to their families or
friends from home. Their descriptions were rich and thick with detail; students loved talking
about how they spent their year and seemed eager to spend more of our time together
discussing the gap year itself, so pivotal were their encounters. In several cases, I had to cut
short the descriptions of the gap-year experiences so that there was enough time remaining to
explore the other questions I had prepared.
The students as a group were a bright and interesting mix of backgrounds and lives.
Collectively, these seven young women and five young men spoke eight different languages
and had come from seven states and two countries outside of the US. Five had attended
public high schools, five had attended private secular high schools, and two had attended
religiously-sponsored high schools. During their gap years, they had done internships,
worked in minimum wage jobs, worked in high paying jobs, volunteered their time, farmed,
82
sailed, taught English to schoolchildren, learned to cook, studied scripture, traveled to new
places, gained proficiency in new languages, formed new lasting friendships, lived with
family members, lived with host families, and lived alone. We could have spent all our time
discussing the details of their gap years, and I believe the students would have welcomed the
chance to do so. However, because the focus of my research was their transition during the
first year of college, we used the majority of our time together to consider the gap-year
experiences retrospectively, and in light of their adjustment to the college environment.
Andy, Daniel, Jackie, Julie, Layla, Lena, Maria, Mark, Paulina, Peter, Tessa and
Vinny became my pen pals and frequent companions during the course of this study. They
were very open with me about the ups and downs of their first months as college students,
sometimes discovering as we talked some new clarity or realization about how their gap-year
encounters were impacting their transitions. As I gathered their accounts and insights, I
came to appreciate their distinctive individual stories, and at the same time found strong
ribbons of connection between their seemingly disparate experiences. The Gap Year Impact
Model (Figure 4) seeks to demonstrate those connections.
83
Figure 4: Gap Year Impact Model
84
Overview of the Gap Year Impact Model
A visual representation of the proposed pathway tracing a student’s experience from
the decision to take a gap year and leading to “Sovereign Engagement” during the first year
of college is provided in Figure 4, a graphic of the “Gap Year Impact Model.” According to
this model, experiences and/or challenges that students faced during their gap year
[Encounters] led to, and appear to have hastened or accelerated, greater personal growth and
increased evidence of self-authorship [Meaning Making], which in turn resulted in greater
agency in the transition to college during the first year [Sovereign Engagement].
Included on the left side of this diagram are the antecedent conditions upon which a
student’s ability to take a gap year rely. These are: “Clear Family Expectations about
College Attendance,” “Strong Record of High School Achievement,” and “Viability of the
Gap Year” (based upon the components of “Financial Feasibility” and “Individual
Motivation”). Each of these factors (a) influences the decisions students make about how to
use their gap year, and (b) has further implications as students move through their gap year
and begin their first year of college. While the impact of these conditions is strongest at the
Encounters phase of this model, it also is apparent that these factors continue to have some
effect on the students’ processes of Meaning Making in response to the Encounters, and
further contributes to the Sovereign Engagement of the students during their first year of
college.
Student participants in this study engaged in a wide variety of activities during their
gap years. Data analysis from the five interactions I had with each student during the course
of their first year gleaned several thematic threads, which I have compiled into a category
called “Encounters,” in an effort to capture a common array of challenges that students were
85
faced with during the gap year. Because my data analysis has led me to focus on the
cognitive, interpersonal and intrapersonal aspects of students’ growth, the Encounters
category identifies experiences that helped students make progress on the path to increased
self-authorship. It is not designed to be an all-encompassing category of challenges students
may have encountered during the gap year.
In essence, then, the Encounters portion of this model includes challenges that
fostered meaning-making among the participants, according to their own accounts. The
developmentally-effective challenges that emerged from their stories are: independent
decision-making; introspection, including spiritual and personal reflection; pushing physical
limits; multigenerational interactions; living and/or traveling independently; earning money
and/or handling expenses; mastery of new skills and concepts; and immersion in a
new/different culture.
These challenges, and a more in-depth explanation of the “Encounters” portion of the
Gap Year Impact Model, will be discussed later in this chapter. Based upon the number of
students who faced each of these challenges, Figure 5 illustrates the commonality of this
range of encounters.
The Meaning Making process of the model, depicted as a spiral to reflect the multiple
cycles of differentiation and integration, focuses on the enhanced self-authorship that was
explained by the participants in their comments and reflections. Essentially, the students
began to enter the crossroads of internally-constructed meaning, as their Encounters during
the gap year hastened their propensity to question external authority and begin to construct,
listen to, and eventually cultivate their internal voices. In addition, the participants were
often particularly cognizant of shifting and deepening relationships with others in their lives.
86
They were, in effect, asking themselves the fundamental intrapersonal, cognitive, and
interpersonal questions identified by Baxter Magolda (2008, 2009):
▪ Who Am I?
▪ How Do I Know?
▪ How Do I Relate to Others?
For the participants in this study, self-authorship was accelerated by the intensity and
number of challenging encounters that students encountered during the gap year, which is
captured in the Encounter portion of this model. Students entered what Baxter Magolda and
King (2012) described as the “Crossroads of Self-Authorship,” in which individuals move
from an initial step of beginning to question the external voice to actively cultivating the
internal voice. This accelerated process of Meaning Making will be described in further
detail later in this chapter.
Finally, at the end of the journey from Encounters and the accelerated process of
Meaning Making is the experience of Sovereign Engagement during the first year of college,
shown as the conclusion of the Gap Year Impact Model. To be transparent, not all the
students were engaged to the same degree, or achieved similar kinds of measurable
accomplishment during their first year — whether in terms of grades, campus involvement,
or personal satisfaction. And yet, this is precisely how the term Sovereign Engagement
emerges from the data: while there were vast differences in the students’ academic
performance, in the extent to which they became involved in campus activities and social
networks, and in their satisfaction with the campus experience, all of the students seemed to
be making thoughtful, internally-driven choices. They described both their successes and
their missteps as the results of their own effort, without levying blame or doubt on other
87
people or circumstances. In particular, the data analysis revealed that, when they got to
college, all 12 students in this study:
▪ Took responsibility for their academic performance;
▪ Appreciated learning for the sake of learning;
▪ Pursued authentic relationships with parents and peers;
▪ Recognized and resisted FOMO (“Fear of Missing Out”);
▪ Valued college as short-term and a privilege; and
▪ Made decisions congruent with their internal voice.Gap Year
Examples of evidence of Sovereign Engagement among the participants will be
shared later in this chapter. It is now important to return to the first part of the Gap Year
Impact Model, and use the students’ own words and stories to illustrate these findings.
Before the Gap Year Decision
To place this study and the participants into context, and to understand how the gap
year impacted the students’ lived experiences during their first year of college, it is relevant
to trace the participants’ paths — from high school to gap year to the first year of college.
Certainly, the 12 student participants made a wide array of choices about how to use their
time during their gap year, and their journeys do not neatly map onto one another. However,
88
in the final analysis, the relationships, experiences, and values that were a part of each
student’s gap year journey also significantly shaped their transition to college during the first
year. Such factors can be said to have been heavily influenced by the conditions that led to
the decision to take a gap year, and therefore it is important that a segment of the initial
interview was spent exploring the students family, high school, and personal backgrounds
prior to the gap year.
Despite the wide variation in gap-year activities in which these students were
engaged, there is a natural inclination to wonder, who are gap-year students, and what ties
them together? What about their experience might allow us to draw some conclusions and
gain some insight? Therefore, while perhaps somewhat ancillary to the core of this study’s
pivotal questions regarding the impact of the gap year, it is essential to consider the common
factors leading to the participants’ decisions to pursue a gap year, and to provide an overview
of the elements of experience that gap-year students share.
These common factors are captured in the preliminary part of the proposed Gap Year
Impact Model. Each participant was influenced by a number of different people — family
members, peers, consultants, teachers, siblings, advisors — and interests — travel, athletics,
spirituality, language learning, work experience, community service, all of which provided a
platform for a wide array of gap year choices. For these participants, three overarching
common denominators emerged: family expectations about going to college, strong high
school achievement, and the viability of the gap year.
89
Clear family expectations about college attendance — the first common
denominator
This study revealed that in every case there was a strong family expectation that the
student would attend college. After assuming thorough clustering of the initial open codes
related to all mentions of family and family expectations about college attendance, it was
clear that there had been significant family influence over the students’ thought processes
regarding college. For example, all 12 participants came from families where at least one,
and in most cases both, of their parents had finished college. In many cases, one or both of
the parents had also attended graduate or professional school. The students described the
ways in which their families had been adamant about the importance of education, and had
conveyed either implicit or explicit expectations about going to college (or a combination of
the two). This is consistent with studies suggesting that cultural subcultures are internalized,
and naturally influence a young person’s aspirations (Swartz, 1997), as described in Chapter
Two.
All of the student participants were clear that their families had held unambiguous
expectations that they would attend college. Each of the students indicated that the messages
were particularly clear when they were growing up, and that at least a college education, if
not also a graduate degree, was expected of them. Therefore, college attendance was not
seen by these students as a choice: they were expected to attend and did not question or
doubt that they would. Within those parameters, the students could decide where and when
they would apply, and what school they would attend. None of these individuals felt they
had to decide whether to go to college.
90
During the initial interviews, participants were explicitly questioned about the
messages that were conveyed by their parents and families regarding the importance of
education. Specifically, students were asked to talk about the educational background of
their parents, and to go into further detail about whether there was a family expectation that
they would attend college. The probe was, “Would you say that in your family/household
there was an expectation that the children (or you in particular) would go to college?” Once
the participant indicated that there was such an expectation, I then probed further to
understand how those expectations may have been conveyed.
In response to this question, most of the participants indicated awareness of an
incontrovertible expectation that they would attend college, and a high value placed on both
learning and degree attainment. “Absolutely,” said Julie, “and obtain advanced degrees.”
She added that “they took pains to inculcate this love of learning, this focus. Very conscious
efforts on their part.” A similar message came through for Paulina, who said, “Yeah, in my
family, it is not an option that we don’t go to college. Oh yeah, no question.” In Paulina’s
family, there was also an expectation that each subsequent generation would do better than
the previous generation, so she felt both pressure and encouragement to to so.
For several students, the messages about education were often exceptionally strong
throughout their childhood, as in Daniel’s case. He said, “I think that my parents made it
very clear from a relatively young age that, you know, I needed to do well in school.” While
other students he knew were rewarded by their families for getting good grades on their
report cards, Daniel indicated that this was not the case in his family. He explained, “that
was the expectation,” adding that falling below the family’s expectation would have been
problematic, but meeting it “was just what should happen.” Lena found going to college to
91
be so clearly embedded in her upbringing that it was difficult to identify the source. “I don’t
remember. I don’t know,” she said. “I guess it was largely such an expectation that it didn’t
need to be said. And in the school that I was going to it was assumed everyone would go to
college.” Maria also felt that her family was a strong influence: “Dad went to college, mom
went to college, it was just expected.”
In several cases, the students recognized that the messages about going to college had
been conveyed both by their families and by the schools they attended. Layla indicated that
the assumption she would attend college came through in messages from both her school and
her family: “Not just from my family – also the school that I went to, it was always an
assumption that you would go to college,” said Layla, “yeah, there was never question of not
going to college for me, and for my siblings as well.” This was also true for Andy, who said,
“it was just sort of inevitability, it was like just something that just everyone assumed . . . not
only my parents, but just my family and everyone in my school.” He added that “my
grandparents feel very strongly that I should go to college, and a college education is, like,
really important.” For Daniel, some very strong messages came through both his religious
school and the Jewish community. He explained that “in the modern Orthodox community
in America, it's pretty common for people graduating high school to go to Israel for a year or
two years, it's like almost universal.”
At other points during the study, students made further allusions to their families’
expectations about college attendance. And in some broader, less specific sense, those
expectations were an underlying assumption throughout the study. To choose not to attend
college would, in fact, have been an anomaly in each of these families. Choosing to do the
gap year, in some sense, challenged the expectation that college would be the next logical
92
step, immediately after high school graduation. In certain cases, however, the students’
families encouraged or even suggested the gap year as an interim step.
What is the significance of the prevalence of strong family messaging with regard to
college attendance within the participant group? In part, it is related to their own conviction
— and that of their families — that they would attend college. In 11 out of the 12 student
stories, the plans had been in place: the students had applied to, and been accepted to, a
prestigious college or university before embarking on the gap year. Paulina was the only
exception to this, as she used her gap year in part to apply to schools. At the time of this
study, each of the students was attending the school to which they had made a commitment
during the spring or summer, just prior to the gap year. These expectations, then, were an
underlying common factor, informing the thought processes of the students as they made
their gap year plans, and having an impact on their experiences during the first year of
college, as well.
In addition, 11 of the 12 students in my study had attended high schools from which
the overwhelming majority of students were headed to college; by contrast, Maria said that
her high school had a somewhat lower rate of college-going graduates. In the stories of these
students, the gap year decision is tied, at least in part, to the students’ parental levels of
educational attainment, and certainly is a very significant contextual factor. These students,
including Maria, decided on different paths than the majority of their peers and classmates.
However, they did not let go of their plan to attend college, as their family and school
acculturation had prepared them to do.
93
Because of these strongly internalized messages, the students’ decisions to step off
the conveyor belt were always framed as choosing an interim period — or moratorium —
before college, not as a time to discern whether to continue on to higher education.
Strong record of high school achievement — the second common denominator
According to their own reports, and as evidenced by their acceptance into the highlyselective institutions that they attended during their first year, students participating in this
study had strong records of academic performance during high school. Whether they had
attended a private preparatory high school, as five participants did, a large public high
school, as did five others in the study, or a religious high school, as did the remaining two
participants, all of the students had been successful high school students, as measured by the
normative tools of grades and test scores. In turn, their high school performance was
sufficient to help them gain access into highly selective colleges and universities, including
the ones they eventually attended. Clearly, this common denominator is tied into family
expectations about going to college, since the students’ high school performance was very
much identified as a predictor or precursor to college acceptance and attendance. The
students reported that they had impressive records of high school achievement, with good
grades, strong test scores, and extensive extracurricular involvement.
Along with standardized test scores, high school performance is what determines a
student's eligibility for admission into college. More specifically, high school achievement
and accomplishments, measured both by grades and by involvement in extracurricular
activities, are essential factors in getting accepted to the three highly-selective institutions
94
from which the participants were drawn. Once accepted, the students in this study contacted
the admission departments at their respective schools, to request a one-year deferral.
In discussing their high school accomplishments, most of the participants identified
themselves as strong and engaged students, using descriptions like “very studious,” “very
involved,” and got “very good grades.” Lena mentioned that, although her public high
school "wasn’t as academically challenging" as she might have liked, she “was still really
involved in my school work and did all of it, and was just that kind of person that everybody
thinks is an overachiever and knows is doing all of these things."
Unlike several other students in the study, Andy did not feel that his high school
grades were exceptionally strong, but acknowledged that his record of interesting technology
projects was the key to his admission. “I had this pretty impressive résumé of stuff I had
done. But I had kind of average or good grades, but not great, you know. Most [API]
students like do pretty well in high school, get pretty great grades.”
While the other student participants had applied to and were accepted to college
before embarking on their gap years, Paulina was the only student in the study who had
applied to colleges during, rather than before, her gap year. In contrast to the other students,
Paulina used her year in part to improve her test-taking skills and to prepare her college
applications to schools in the US, because her high school in Latin America had not provided
adequate guidance about the US application processes. It was also exceptionally small, with
just six students in her graduating class. “I wasn’t ready after being in a small high school,”
said Paulina, “like being with the six people and going by myself to another country with a
thousand of people, that will be kind of shocking.” While her sequence of events was
slightly different than the others in the study, Paulina’s experience still reflects and supports
95
the notion that both strong academic performance and strong family expectations correlate
with the gap year decision.
With these conditions of family expectations and strong high school performance as a
common foundation, the viability of taking a gap year then comes into play. Two key
conditions emerged from the participants’ comments about their gap year decisions:
individual motivation, and financial feasibility.
Viability of the gap year — the third common denominator
There was another important theme throughout all the preliminary interviews, which
were held in September or October 2013, at the start of the students’ first semester in college.
During this interview, the students were asked a number of questions about how they arrived
at the decision to take a gap year, and further how they determined what they would be doing
during the year. Their responses coalesced into what I have referred to in the preliminary
part of the model as “viability of the gap year,” identifying the circumstances that made a gap
year possible for them.
A record of strong achievement in high school and clear family expectations that a
college education is essential do not necessarily or obviously lead to the decision to take a
gap year. From such circumstances, most students continue directly to college from high
school. As discussed in Chapter Two, there exist a number of barriers or disincentives to
taking a year off between high school and college. How might it be, therefore, a viable
option for the student to take a gap year in the first place? My data analysis reveals that, for
the participants in my study, the viability of the gap year built on two pertinent features:
96
individual motivation (often inspired by role models or other influences in their lives) and
financial feasibility (which may be based on family resources, earned income, or exterior
sources of funding). This does not necessarily imply family encouragement, as four of the
students talked about one or more family members who disapproved or were skeptical of the
plan.
All 12 of the participants expressed that they were individually motivated to find and
pursue gap year options. Some did most of the legwork on their own, four had worked with
consultants, most took advice from teachers or family friends, and some had strong parental
involvement in their decisions. All of them were responsible for planning their gap years, in
terms of identifying and arranging the specific activities. In other words, the decision was
theirs. They were not pushed or cajoled into taking a gap year. Nor were they required by
their colleges to take a gap year, although the Admission Offices at all three schools are
happy to support, and in some cases promote, gap years. Indeed, according to its Admission
Office, one of the schools (DU) does admit about 50 students each year on a deferred
enrollment model – in effect, mandating a gap year for a cohort of students who may not
otherwise seem ready for the college experience.
The idea of viability encompasses two specific conditions that make it possible for
students to choose a gap year, and to select the particular components of their gap-year
experience: financial feasibility and individual motivation.
Viability: Financial feasibility
Regardless of socioeconomic status, each student had a discussion with family
members about how to finance the gap year. In some cases, the students’ families were
97
willing and financially able to support the year without hardship. For Layla and for Jackie,
for example, it was this stability that allowed them each to pursue volunteer and travel
experiences without having to contribute financially. Other students received financial
support from their families after determining expected costs of their gap year. For instance,
Daniel discussed with his family that a year at a yeshiva would cost substantially less than a
year of college, and they were willing to fund the experience. Maria spent part of the year
earning money to help finance the time that she interned and traveled in South America, an
agreement she had worked out with her parents. “I didn’t have enough saved up to cover
everything, and it was basically based on how much I worked over the summer, determined
how long I could stay,” she explained. She worked two minimum-wage jobs for the first half
of the year.
Lena’s teaching job through City Year was funded by the program, so she was
compensated for her basic living expenses. “I knew it wouldn’t be a ton of money,” said
Lena, “but it’s totally possible to live on the stipend… I totally made it work and, I mean it
was definitely less expensive than a year of college.” And Andy earned a sufficiently large
salary working in Silicon Valley to cover his living costs and save money to pay his
subsequent college expenses. The generous financial incentive made it a particular
challenging decision, explained Andy, because in addition to the professional encouragement
he was receiving from his employers, “they also offered me a very large amount of money …
some of it in cash, and some of it in equity in the company, and I could choose how much I
wanted of each. So, it was a really tough decision for me.”
Julie had been fascinated by Turkey since first seeing a guidebook about the country
in ninth grade. She had done some research and determined that it would cost her about
98
$15,000 to fund a trip to Turkey during her gap year. That was not an amount her family
would have been willing to pay, “but then I heard about these scholarship programs,” said
Julie. “A hundred percent paid for by the state department, and I was like, that’s the ticket.”
Finances also were a big factor in Tessa’s decision. She knew she wanted to spend
the year in Israel, and many students from her high school went to study in a yeshiva there
before college. However, her sense was that yeshivas tend to be expensive, and she wasn’t
sure that was how she wanted to spend the year. The service program she joined offered a
monthly stipend for living expenses, so Tessa was only responsible for her travel expenses.
She explained that this made it possible for her to embark on the year. "I paid for my flight,
but then I got a stipend for groceries every month," said Tessa. "So that was convenient and
that was definitely a big factor in my decision."
In each case, the students needed to determine what expenses they would incur, and
how these would be covered. While students like Jackie and Mark (who said, “the finances
weren’t an issue”) were able to rely fully on their parents for support, others like Julie and
Vinny researched their options on their own, and came up with plans that felt both
responsible and realistic to their parents. Vinny, for example, was living at home,
volunteering as a researcher in a lab, and training for athletics. He explained that he did not
incur many expenses during the year: “it was the same expense as the year before, really.”
Viability: Individual motivation
In various ways, each student in this study was motivated by one or more personal
goals, desires, or realizations. The viability of the gap year, whether it had been suggested or
supported by others, hinged on their own desire to create a plan.
99
During our initial interviews, I asked the students what they had hoped to accomplish
by taking a gap year. In many cases, they expressed that they had felt somehow “burned out”
from high school, exhausted from the constant pressure to strive and achieve (in order make
it into a good college). However, many capable high school students are reported to feel
“burned out” and yet relatively few make a decision to pursue a gap year. Therefore, these
students show evidence of a catalyst — a spark that emboldened them to pursue the gap year.
Sometimes the spark was tied into something the student wanted to learn or improve. For
Vinny, it was becoming a better competitive athlete; for Julie, it was fulfillment of her dream
of living in Turkey. The spark may have come from either an outside source, such as Tessa’s
stepfather, who encouraged her to pursue national service in Israel, or an alumnae panel for
seniors in high school, like the one that helped to inspire Layla to explore the chance to go to
India. Layla explained that after hearing an alum speak about her own gap year experience,
“frankly, I knew I wanted to take a gap year, like long before I knew where I wanted to go to
college. Like, from that moment, I kind of wanted to work that into my plan.”
The initial catalysts, then, frequently included role models, such as others in their
family or school or friend group who had taken a gap year or believed in doing so. For the
two students who attended religious high schools, the fact that the gap year was the norm
created a kind of collective push toward taking a gap year.
For Paulina, the motivation came from her desire “to prepare myself for college, like
mentally and psychologically.” Unlike most of her peers, she was interested in attending
college in the US, but “I needed to find myself before that,” said Paulina. I couldn’t just
come here.” Layla remembered being excited about having the chance to use her gap year to
travel and do service, but that “at some points people were like, ‘Oh, don’t you want to go to
100
college, like, don’t you feel ready for college?’ And I was like, ‘college will be there, I want
to do something else first.’”
Using the gap year to travel was also important to Peter, who grew up in Eastern
Europe, and had originally expected to attend college there. He said he had known since
about ninth grade that he wanted to take a gap year. “I knew that I wanted to spend a year
after high school in South America learning Spanish, and of course I also thought, or I guess
I assumed, I was going to go to university in [my home city], because that's what you do.”
Lena researched the City Year program on her own and then, she explained, “I pretty
much told my dad, ‘this is what I’m going to do.’” She felt that she wanted to use her gap
year to explore “all the ways I could push myself to become more interesting or more
effective, more of a fearless, confident, competent person. And so I, like, figured that a gap
year would hold a lot of opportunities for me to be able to do that.”
For Daniel, the opportunity to live and study in Israel was both a chance to immerse
himself in Orthodox Jewish culture and study, and “an opportunity for spiritual growth, a
time to keep worrying not about homework and grades, but rather about myself, about like
who I am as a person rather than how am going to do on this next exam.”
Mark said he was excited about going on a rugged NOLS course for several months,
in part because he wanted to “get away from all those distractions, like TV and cell phones,
and like even sometimes other people, and, like, live away from that. And I’m always trying
to, like, live in the present more, and I feel like there’s no better way to do that than to get
away from all those distractions.” Vinny indicated that he was motivated by athletics and the
chance to get some work experience, but mostly “I felt ready for college, but I didn’t feel as
101
ready as I could be. I still felt kind of, like, burnt out from high school, and I didn’t feel like
if I went, I would be the best student I could be.”
These comments illustrate a range of personal reasons for taking a gap year, but a
common strength of individual motivation can be detected throughout. Despite what may
have been the prevailing attitudes in their high schools or their families, these 12 individuals
had deep convictions about the value of taking a gap year. Rather than simply avoiding or
delaying college, they seemed to be focused on pursuing something else that was important
to them, that would allow them the opportunity to grow and change in important ways.
Once arriving at college, the participants had interactions with peers at their
institutions that support the finding that individual motivation was a salient factor. When
meeting classmates, participants found their peers to be impressed that they had chosen to
take a gap year. Three participants specifically described having met other students who said
they couldn’t have imagined themselves taking a gap year, either because there was a
particular barrier, or because they lacked the individual motivation to do so. In contrast, the
students in this study did have the motivation to choose a gap year before going to college.
Gap Year Decision Making
The decision to take a gap year, then, is influenced by family expectations, high
school achievement, financial feasibility and individual motivation. With all these conditions
solidly in place, the students participating in this study still had to grapple with certain
aspects of the plan. Is this the right decision? Can I find an experience or set of experiences
that seem worthwhile? Will my family support the plan? Will the college grant me a one-
102
year deferral? Students consulted with family members, friends, trusted teachers and school
guidance counselors as they explored their options and built their arguments for taking a gap
year. In some cases, there was a lot of support, and in others students’ plans were met with
resistance or skepticism. Of course, in the end, each of these 12 students came to the
conclusion that taking the gap year would be beneficial to them, even if someone close to
them was less than supportive.
Some students were influenced by others in their lives, or individuals whom they had
met while they were in high school. For example, Mark has two older siblings who had
taken gap years, so his mother posed the gap year question to him around the time he was
preparing his college applications. He said, “my main thought process was like, there’s
never gonna be another time in my life when it’s this easy to just take a year off and kinda do
whatever I want. And since I’m not in a rush to go to college, I see no reason to not take
advantage of that.” Mark found the SC Admission staff to be quite receptive to the idea, as
well, when he called to request a deferral from Fall 2012 to Fall 2013, which made the plan
that much simpler to enact.
When Maria's family hosted an exchange student from Europe while she was in high
school, she began thinking that taking a year off after high school and traveling to a different
country would be a great experience for her, as well. Her family was supportive, but
expected Maria to share responsibility for financing the year, so she built into her plans
several months living at home and working two retail jobs to earn money to fund her travel to
South America.
Like Maria, Layla began thinking about a gap year during her junior year of high
school. She had attended an alumni panel and heard a former student talking about her own
103
gap-year experience, and felt inspired to do her own journey. “Frankly, I knew I wanted to
take a gap year long before I knew where I wanted to go to college,” Layla said. “From that
moment, I kind of wanted to work that into my plan.”
When people around him in high school suggested to Andy that he should take a gap
year, he was initially resistant. “I told them I didn’t want to, and I thought it wasn’t a good
idea, because if I took a gap year, I would never want to go to school again.” According to
Andy, he was already doing what he calls “cool tech stuff,” so people who knew him thought
he should get some experience in the tech world and pursue those interests before starting
college. Andy had been working for a high tech firm during the summer after high school,
and was confronted with the decision about taking a gap year when he was offered an
opportunity to stay on with the company for an additional year. During our focus group, he
commented, with some degree of irony, that “people say if you take a gap year, and you
spend a year like away from education, when you get there, you’ll be more focused, you’ll
know more about what you wanna do sort of with your life, or just sort of maybe even just
what you’re interested in, and what you like doing, and that’ll help you be focused in college
– that’s something that people say a lot.” In the end, Andy’s decision was a financially
lucrative one for him. Not only did he incur minimal expenses during his gap year, but the
firm that had hired him paid him a significant salary, which could be used to pay for
subsequent expenses, including college.
Two students in this study were greatly influenced by their religious and school
communities. Daniel, who had independently chosen to attend a Jewish day school near his
home, was drawn to the gap year because he had learned that a large percentage of students
in “the modern Orthodox Jewish community” in the US spend a year or more in Israel before
104
going to college. His family, however, was initially resistant, and his grandparents did not
support the idea. “Both my mom’s parents went to college and they were very adamantly
opposed to me taking a gap year,” Daniel told me. He added that when the idea first came
up, “my parents were discouraging me from doing it for the most part,” but after much
discussion, they came to the conclusion that “if this is something that I think is good for me,
they are going to trust me, they're going to let me go through with it.”
Tessa had also attended a Jewish day school, where a large percentage of her
classmates spent a year in Israel after high school. Rather than study in a yeshiva, however,
she was eager to find another way to experience living in Israel. She accepted help from her
stepfather, who is an Israeli citizen, researching opportunities with an Israeli national service
program, which led to her year of teaching in a school, and living with other Israelis.
For students who had specific goals for their gap years, their internal motivation was
a driving force for structuring the year. Vinny, for example, was very motivated to improve
his athletic skills so that he would be a better competitive athlete when he got to college.
When he found a position in a lab close to home, it seemed feasible for him to live at home,
do intensive athletic training, and work in the lab. Because she was motivated to carve out a
life that was even better than that of her parents, Paulina wanted to improve her chances of
attending a highly-selective college in the US — which could lead to greater opportunity —
and to explore some possible career paths. She identified several specific activities that
would allow her to hone her test-taking skills and also gather some relevant internship
experience in medicine and business. Lena was very excited about teaching kids in an innercity school through City Year, because she wanted to see what it was like to do social justice
work in a high-need community. She added, “I think my desire to do that came out of an
105
interest in public education, but also just like a desire to challenge myself and to do
something different that I didn’t think I necessarily could do, or that I wasn’t sure I would be
good at. But just like, also something different.”
That quest for something different was shared, in fact, by several of the participants.
Whether the “something different” was simply not attending school full-time as they had
been for the previous 12 years, or heading to a new country, or tackling a new set of skills,
the students all rejected the commonly-followed trajectory to pursue their particular passions
and goals. Therefore, it is important to look at what happens to gap-year students once they
make that less popular choice, using the Gap Year Impact Model as a guide.
Conclusion
This chapter has traced the findings of this study, guided by a visual and textual
model that initially elucidates the factors leading to a decision to take a gap year. I then used
the students’ own words and stories to illustrate how a student’s gap year Encounters
hastened Meaning Making, which in turn lead to Sovereign Engagement of the student
during the first college year. Chapters Five and Six will explain the core components of the
Gap Year Impact Model, with specific examples of Encounters, Meaning Making and
Sovereign Engagement shared by the student participants. In Chapter Seven, I discuss
several of these findings through another lens, with an eye toward possible future research
and implications for practice in the field of higher education.
106
CHAPTER FIVE: GAP YEAR ENCOUNTERS AND MEANING MAKING
Introduction
The term “Encounters” is the portion of the Gap Year Impact Model that describes
challenges which fostered “Meaning Making” among the participants. Students involved in
this study engaged in a range of activities, the majority of which were significantly different
than their prior experience of attending high school and participating in various
extracurricular activities. The range of activities and interactions the students encountered
constituted what King et al. (2009) called “developmentally effective experiences,” noting
that these help to promote self-authorship in college students.
Gap Year Impact Model: Encounters
During the first round of interviews I invited the students to “walk me through the
year,” giving as much detail as they would like about how they spent their time between high
school and college. Through these discussions, I learned that the participants were involved
in a wide array of gap-year activities, some of which they had planned on their own, and
others that had been planned in part, or completely, by others. The range of activities
included community service; athletic training; working for pay in a minimum-wage, modest
or high-paying position; studying and learning a new skill or language; domestic or
107
international travel; intensive religious study; teaching; internships; farming; living at home;
and living away from home. As they spoke of these activities, the students recalled with
great detail the events that provoked moments of introspection or growth during the gap year.
Figure 5 illustrates the range of encounters in which these students engaged during
their gap years, and the frequency of each type of encounter among the group of participants.
This chart abstracts the particular details of each of their individual years -- such as working
at KMart or living in India -- in order to capture the experiences and group the encounters
into common categories. As an example, all 12 of the participants found themselves in some
way immersed in a new and/or different culture -- whether a different country with a
dominant language other than the one in which they were raised, or a work environment in
which the student needed to learn and adopt the practices and terminology of the
organization. This cultural immersion is reflected in the chart as a feature that was common
to all 12 participants.
• Immersion	
  in	
  a	
  new/different	
  culture	
  (12)
• Mastery	
  of new	
  skills	
  and	
  concepts	
  (12)
• Introspection,	
  including	
  spiritual	
  and	
  personal	
  reflection	
  (12)
• Independent	
  decision-­‐making	
  (11)
• Multigenerational	
  interactions	
  (11)
• Living	
  and/or	
  traveling	
  independently	
  (9)
• Earning	
  money	
  and/or	
  handling	
  expenses	
  (8)
• Service/Civic	
  Engagement	
  (6)
• Pushing	
  physical	
  limits	
  (3)
Figure 5: Participants’ Gap Year Encounters
108
Though the specific gap year activities varied from person to person, some clear
themes emerged. The interview transcripts, written responses, and focus group data revealed
that the participants’ processes of making meaning, enhanced by the particular encounters
they had during their gap year, hastened their route to self-authorship. That is, the more
experiences students had that challenged them, and the more challenging the experience, the
greater the acceleration from external to internal meaning-making. In addition, challenges
that were most different from their high school experiences seem to have produced the most
significant development. This is evidence that such experiences were developmentally
effective.
Bronfenbrenner (1989, 1993) described these encounters as “proximal processes,” in
reference to the developmentally significant experiences that a person may have. Proximal
processes are encounters inviting increased complexity of thought and understanding. As
explored in Chapter 2, Bronfenbrenner was interested in the interaction of the person, the
process, the context and the time (PPCT). Indeed, the participants in this study were able to
articulate ways in which their encounters led to self-reflection and a deeper understanding of
themselves and the world around them. My analysis suggests that gap-year students are
likely to have encounters that serve as profound proximal processes, and therefore accelerate
the process of making meaning out of their experience.
As mentioned previously, all 12 of the students in this study were immersed in a new
and different culture, whether that meant moving to a different part of the country or of the
world, joining a work environment, or engaging with a new process of learning. The
students had ventured off of the “conveyor belt” — or the typical educational trajectory —
and, to various degrees, sought out a new cultural context. In many cases, this meant living
109
away from home, which all but one of the students did for at least part of their gap year. In
most cases, the students chose to engage in something that might be considered “out of their
comfort zone,” not because they were necessarily pushing themselves to extraordinary limits,
but typically because they had chosen an experience that was in some ways new and different
to them. These are examples of increased complexity in their interactions with the world
around them. No longer immersed in a homogeneous, familiar, or comfortable environment,
the gap-year students were engaged in encounters that allowed or required them to engage
more intentionally in their own experience.
All 12 of the students also used at least a portion of their gap year to master a new
skill or concept, whether or not this had been an articulated goal for the year. The skill may
have been as simple as doing laundry regularly, as Layla did, or as complex as Andy’s
negotiation of the dynamics of a fast-paced workplace environment. In addition, all 12
participants reported that they spent time during the gap year engaged in some kind of
personal or spiritual reflection. This was especially true for Julie, in large part because she
was an American Christian young woman living in a predominantly Muslim society. It was
also true for Maria, whose volunteer and work experiences — and distance from her high
school cohort — provided ample opportunity for independent introspection.
One interesting factor that emerged from the students’ accounts of their gap years is
that 11 of the 12 the students had been living and/or working in multigenerational
environments. With the exception of Daniel (who had studied in an Israeli yeshiva with
many other young men his own age), most of the time spent by these participants during their
gap years was not with peers, but with children, or with working adults, or with families.
During some of the encounters, the students spent time with other people their own age.
110
Even then, those were not the same sets of peers they had encountered in high school or
would eventually meet when they got to college. A great deal of perspective seems to have
emerged from the time spent developing relationships with others, which contributes to the
finding that the “Encounter” leads to enhanced “Meaning Making.” During the focus groups,
some of the students’ discussions centered on the multigenerational aspect of the gap-year
experience, the ease they found making new friends when they arrived at college, and their
reactions to having returned to a same-age-peer environment.
The multigenerational encounters, in fact, appeared to be among the most crucial in
terms of making meaning out of the gap-year experience. In other words, students’
interactions with individuals who were not their generational peers — and the development
of personal relationships with these individuals — brought enhanced perspective to the gapyear students as they reflected on their own values and priorities. Because this factor is such
a departure from the normal educational trajectory (in which students tend to spend the
majority of their time and energy in same-age peer groups), I point to it as a remarkable
ingredient in enhancing students’ ability to explore the questions at the Crossroads of SelfAuthorship (Baxter Magolda, 2004; Baxter Magolda & King, 2012). When their primary
social interactions are no longer with a group of peers, individuals are more likely to
encounter a range of perspectives that are different from their own. Not all of the students
were able to articulate the significance of this factor, and not all of them expressed
appreciation for their multigenerational relationships.
Maria felt rather lonely during the months of her internship, as she was working long
days and commuting to and from the house where she was renting a room. Over time, she
developed relationships with her coworkers, from a range of ages. “By the end of my time
111
there, we would like, some nights, we’d leave work together and all go see a movie, or just
go out to eat for lunch,” Maria remembered.
While she was in India, Layla lived for part of her time in a volunteer home that
housed people from a number of different countries. She was living in a multigenerational,
international home and spending her days volunteering with young girls in an afterschool
program. Of her housemates, she remembered that “there was one woman who was like 50 –
maybe she was closer to 60 – so there were like, it was diverse, even though the median age
was probably like early 20’s. And so I lived with those people.”
Lena said she felt conflicted, at times, about the absence of a same-age peer group
during her gap year. Her days teaching were long and exhausting. She explained that, “I
would think like, well I feel like I’m 28 years old but I haven’t had any of the fun of college
or of having really established friends that people who are 28 have. And so I’m doing like all
of the work of being a 28-year-old without any of the fun.”
Several student participants spent all or part of their gap year living at home while
pursuing internships or other activities. Looking back on the part of his year living at home
with his family, Peter felt grateful, especially because he had attended a private boarding
school for the previous two years. As he began to notice how infrequently he was in contact
with his family once he started college, Peter reflected that “it was very, very good that I
spent such large amount of time with my family last year. So I am just, all of these thoughts
just reinforce that it was really good to spend time with my family last year and it was really
important.”
112
Peter’s ability to recognize the significance of shifting relationships helps to illustrate
the value of stepping away from the same-age peer group and gaining perspective by
investing in other, multigenerational relationships.
Stories about Encounters
Mark loves to tell the story of the first day his group went mountaineering. He
remembers arriving at the base of the mountain around noon, and finding out that the
campground was full -- there was no room for their group to stay overnight at the base camp,
as had been their plan. They had expected to sleep there and then spend the following day
hiking the three-plus miles up to the top. At 2:45 pm, they decided there was no choice but
to start hiking. Their packs were loaded down with ten days of food rations, heavy hiking
equipment and camping gear. The hike took seven hours.
Mark was pushed beyond any physical limits he had encountered before. He
continued, “so I remember being like, after hiking for five hours with 70 pounds on my back,
up like an extremely steep hill, I remember thinking ‘I’m cold, sweaty, tired, hungry, I have
to go to the bathroom, I’m dehydrated, and I just wanna go to sleep right now.’ But I
couldn’t, I had to keep walking, and it seemed like it wasn’t gonna stop.” Near the top of the
mountain, the group was forced to make a treacherous crossing of a fast-moving stream. “So
that was the only time in my [NOLS course] I thought, like, ‘I might die right now,’” said
Mark. Eventually, they made it safely to the camp.
There is an arc to the way Mark tells the story, as if he is back on the mountain again.
He pauses for a moment, and it’s clear he can feel the cold and exhaustion and sense of
113
accomplishment all over again. “So that night really drove home that point that I can really
push myself a lot farther than I think or even feel like I can,” he explained.
Mark’s story is an example of a gap-year encounter that promoted, or accelerated, his
ability to cultivate his internal voice as he made meaning of his experience – or, as described
by Baxter Magolda, King, and others (2004, 2008, 2012), he experienced “developmental
progression in entering the crossroads.” It was through encounters like this one during his
gap year that Mark began to trust his internal voice, and began to develop into the sovereign
college student he was to become when he began his first year as a student at SC.
This theme of cultivating self-authorship emerged strongly in the stories of all 12
participants in this study. They made meaning out of their experiences with a strong sense of
self – in terms of academic performance, developing or maintaining relationships, or
involvement in other activities during their first semester – and not one of them seemed to
hold anyone else responsible for their circumstances. Instead, like Mark, they found ways to
recognize their own abilities, draw on their inner strength, and choose the path that was right
for them.
Julie is a budding anthropologist who often felt isolated during her gap-year
experience living in Turkey. She thought about that as she settled into the first semester at
DU, as she wrote in her December reflection that her time abroad “forced me to draw upon
an inner source of comfort in times of loneliness or struggle, and that is still with me when I
walk around the dining hall looking for somewhere to sit, or ask someone if they want to
hang out with me.”
Indeed, Julie felt that her gap-year experience caused her to become more selfsufficient and at the same time deeply appreciative of others. Her greater sense of self
114
seemed to strengthen her ability to thrive, and to explore new relationships as wonderful
possibilities. “I approach things with this knowledge,” she wrote, “and so ANYONE who
wants to be friends with me is a blessing, even more so if I like them back.” (Emphases are
hers.)
Lena, who volunteered with CityYear during her gap year, thought often during her
first year of college about what she learned through some of the most challenging kids she
taught at an inner-city Baltimore middle school. One boy, in particular, Darnell, seemed to
respond to her encouragement when she worked with him one-on-one. It was Lena’s sense
that Darnell was very bright, but that, like many of his classmates, he didn’t see the value of
education. She began to recognize that there were limits to her ability to have an impact on
his academic success, and further, that she cannot control everything about her experience, or
ensure that things will turn out the way she envisions they should.
“I had really high expectations for him because I knew that he could do it. He didn’t
know he could do it. Somebody wasn’t always pushing him to come to school." Lena
learned during her first semester at DU that Darnell had been held back at school for the
second time, despite her hopes for his success. "And I’m worried because I don’t know if
there’s anybody who’s pushing him," said Lena, "because I think a lot of times they give up
on the kids who were held back, especially like the kids who want you to think they’re scary,
when in fact they’re not really scary."
Her experience working with Darnell helped Lena to learn that, although she was
investing in the student and making it clear that she believed he could be successful, she was
not able to control whether he would be motivated to achieve. She said, "as much as I
115
wanted to help him and expected really great things from him, he…he needs to be the one to
believe in himself and make things happen."
Lena made some important connections between the work she was doing with
students like Darnell, and the context of their experience. She also thought deeply about her
own level of privilege in comparison to theirs. “[T]hey heard all the time that education is so
important, but I got the sense that nobody they really knew personally had directly benefitted
from a good education, and when I said things like that to that effect, or when their teachers
said things like that … I could just see them in their head, ‘Yeah, but you’re white. That’s
why education works for you.’ And that’s hard – like, you can’t really argue against that
because they’re right.”
While Lena’s insights may have been unanticipated outcomes of her work with
CityYear, Daniel describes his journey during his gap year as one of intentional religious
transformation. “(T)he connection I made with Israel is something that I didn’t think it was
going to happen necessarily but it was very welcome and it was definitely life changing,”
said Daniel during our first interview. He explained that, after his year there, Israel felt even
more like home to him than the US.
Life-changing experiences do not necessarily have to take a student to a new country
or region of the world. One of the experiences that Peter had during his gap year was
working at a government agency while he lived at home. He described this as “probably the
most formal work setting you can have,” and explained that he woke up early every day,
wore a suit and tie to work, and typically did not get home until seven in the evening. This
experience had a tremendous influence on Peter’s perspective on work, as he “absolutely
didn't like” the routine. He began to examine this further because “when I told people about
116
it they started laughing, because well, that's what you are going to do for the rest of your
life.” It was an important insight for Peter, who used the experience in part to refine his
thoughts about his career aspirations. He also learned to appreciate weekends, during which
he was not expected to work.
Peter’s subsequent experience, however, was in South America, working for Habitat
for Humanity, a place where the employees worked long hours not because they were
required to but because they loved their jobs. This was an important contrast in terms of
working conditions, and Peter seemed to be wrestling with it during our initial interview. “I
think I never really thought about it so consciously,” Peter said, “but comparing these two
experiences is really important.” He explained that “overall these very different experiences
I had in my gap year will dramatically influence decisions I would take in the future.”
Some students found themselves faced with a challenging experience that was not
built into the design of their gap year. For instance, Mark had planned to spend about three
months studying music at a small music school in North Carolina, and he moved there to
study music full-time for the second part of his gap year. However, it turned out not to offer
some of the components he had expected. He talked with the director of the school and they
attempted to work out a more enjoyable experience for him, but Mark still wasn't happy with
what he was learning, and recognized that he needed to trust his own feelings about the
situation. “I gave it a couple weeks and it wasn't really getting better, and … well, there was
a better way to spend the next five months of my gap year, than dreading going to music
school every day.” Mark shortened his stay at the school and did some research into other
options for studying music closer to home, explaining that he signed up for some other
courses that were “exactly what I wanted.”
117
Encounters Lead to Meaning Making
In the Gap Year Impact Model, the “Encounter” represents one of a number of
developmentally-effective experiences that provide a platform for personal growth. I have
described these experiences as challenges, because they demanded that the students expand
or develop a set of skills and approaches that they had not previously fully honed. Although
this group of 12 students represent a tremendously varied set of gap-year activities, the
concept of the “Encounter” conveys the ways that the students were using their time in one or
more activities that do not replicate either high school or college.
It is the cycles of differentiation and integration that these “Encounters” demanded
that pushed and promoted increased self-authorship in the students, and helped them to make
meaning out of their experiences.
Gap Year Impact Model: Accelerated Process of Meaning Making
Through the encounters they had during their gap years, these students learned a great
deal about themselves and what felt important to them. They learned to consider and
evaluate the world around them by interpreting their experiences, many of which were
departures from their previous progressions through structured school-based activities. As a
result, they entered and moved through the “Crossroads of Self-Authorship,” as described by
Baxter Magolda (2004, 2009). According to Baxter Magolda, “[a]s young adults begin to
compose their own realities and recenter into adult contexts, they renegotiate the relationship
of their internal voices and external influence.” (2009, p. 625). Through their encounters,
gap-year students’ approaches to making meaning repeatedly shifted and realigned. That is,
they experienced significant growth that moved them along the continuum from externally-
118
defined to internally-defined validation and meaning. In essence, the principles formerly
guiding their decision-making no longer provided a sufficient framework for the students’
relationships and choices.
As they developed stronger self-authoring perspectives, they began to “define their
beliefs and act using criteria that are internally rather than externally derived.” (Baxter
Magolda & King, 2012, p. 5). In other words, gap year students were inspired to focus on
their own values and belief systems, because their encounters forced awareness and reflected
that hastened their ability to construct meaning out of their experiences. They also refined
their sense of purpose, whether in terms of their educational goals, their personal convictions,
or their future career paths. Perhaps most importantly, the encounters they had during their
gap years provoked the students to disassemble and reassemble their bases of understanding.
Such processes are described by student development theorists and researchers as cycles of
“differentiation and integration” or “transition and consolidation” (Jones & Abes, 2013;
Baxter Magolda, 2008, 2009; Magolda & King, 2012; King et al., 2009; ASHE, 2012).
Despite previous research concluding that the majority of students on college
campuses are externally oriented (King et al., 2009), this group of students demonstrated a
heightened capacity for internal definition. The encounters they had during their gap years
instigated multiple cycles of differentiation and integration, which resulted in an accelerated
process of meaning making. During their gap years, these students needed to become
comfortable with new and different cultural lenses that sometimes required them to let go of
prior assumptions, associations, and aspirations. They had to make use of the tools at hand to
accomplish things. They made more decisions on a daily basis, learning to trust their own
judgment about where to go, how to get there, how to spend their money, what to eat, whom
119
to trust, and with whom to spend their time. Most of these decisions had not been required of
them before the gap year, and the complexity of these encounters led them to cultivate their
internal voices.
In their own accounts of their transitions to college during the first year, the students
revealed evidence of their own growth and development, and often were able to attribute that
growth directly to their gap year encounters. This reflects a more internally-driven
perspective that Baxter Magolda and King suggested “provides a guide for determining what
to pay attention to, whose advice to listen to, what can be gleaned from a positive or negative
experience, and in general how to navigate complex environments, including college
campuses” (Baxter Magolda & King, 2012, p. 4).
In terms of cognitive growth (Baxter Magolda’s expression of developing insights
into the question, “How do I know?”), the students became acutely aware of the ways that
their previously-formed perspectives did not fully align with their newly-acquired
understanding of the world. Each time they faced a dissonant experience, they had to find a
way to reconcile it with their previous understanding, sometimes needing to reconcile a
closely-held tenet of their prior contexts.
Greater responsibility for decision-making leads to cognitive growth, as well. During
their gap year, the students often were not able to rely on others to make decisions, as many
needed to prepare their own meals, handle travel plans, or manage their finances. Therefore,
encounters that pushed students to make responsible decisions and handle the consequences
of those decisions led to the students’ cognitive development in the form of more complex
meaning-making and internal locus of validation and decision-making. They began to find
their own answers to questions and gain perspective and evidence through their choices. The
120
students had time for meaningful reflection during the course of the year, a condition that
both allowed for and enhanced cognitive changes.
In terms of interpersonal growth (“How do I relate to others?”), each of the students
met new people, developed new relationships, and considered the dynamics of their existing
relationships. In particular, all but one of the students spent time during their gap year in
multigenerational setting — whether in a work environment, living situation, or another
aspect of their experience. This is another way in which departing from the traditional
educational path became a truly significant encounter. The students began to see themselves
in different contexts, not only among their peers, but in many cases also with children, young
adults, and older adults, whose life experiences were very different from their own. As noted
above, these multigenerational interactions were among the richest for this cohort in terms of
the students’ processes of clarifying their values and senses of purpose.
Some, like Layla and Jackie, met people from different socioeconomic backgrounds;
others, like Maria and Peter, interacted with others from different countries; and some, like
Julie, got to know people of different religious backgrounds. As a result, their interpersonal
growth took place in a fertile environment for developing relationships across generational or
other socially-constructed lines. This is salient for two explicit reasons. First, because they
saw how rich and meaningful those relationships can be; and second, because it helped them
learn that they can be capable and confident in unfamiliar social situations, and that each new
person is interesting and has worth.
For Andy, the gap year was a chance to develop relationships with some family
friends he had not previously known but who were willing to house him during his year
working in California. He got along with them very well, and “I sort of had, like, two little
121
sisters for the year, which was really fun.” In his workplace, Andy had direct, regular contact
with a small group of young men who held various positions within the company. And
during the year, he got to know a number of other young people in the Silicon Valley area,
many of whom had ties to or interest in the hi-tech world. These relationships were
important to him, in large part because they filled his social needs, and also because he found
new sources of personal support for the decision he had made to spend the year there.
Lastly, and most importantly, profound intrapersonal growth (“Who Am I?”) was
evident in multiple and complex ways for all participants. In the face of specific challenges
or moments of dissonance, the students found they increased their capacity for self-reliance.
Whether wholly anticipated or utterly unplanned, the encounters that comprised their gapyear experiences became the catalysts for making sense of themselves in new contexts. In
my estimation, this was the most dramatic aspect of development for all 12 of them, and in
turn led to the most significant shift toward self-authorship.
For example, in addition to a rigorous athletic schedule and full-time work in a
medical lab, Vinny faced some personal hardships during his gap year: his father was ill for
several months, his girlfriend broke up with him, and his dog of 12 years died. In terms of
handling all of this, Vinny reflected, he spent a lot of time processing his feelings internally,
without many external sources of support. “But I think by doing that on my own, I grew,”
said Vinny, “like, I can take on any challenge that college throws at me now, like I don’t
think anything is gonna be as rough as that was.”
For example, Jackie wrote with tremendous passion in her December reflections (the
capital letter emphases are hers): “More than anything, it has taught me that I CAN MAKE
THINGS HAPPEN IN MY LIFE. I AM IN CONTROL (but only because my circumstances
122
allow me to be). I can become the person I want to become – I am not locked into who I
have been. I am allowed to define myself.” She wrote at some length about the extent to
which she recognizes she is at the helm of the things she chooses to study, the people with
whom she chooses to interact, and the ways in which her identity takes shape. The process
of reflecting on her gap year once she arrived at college allowed Jackie to recognize that,
when she was in high school, she was highly influenced by the opinions of others, and that
she had been afraid of being judged for her actions or choices. She continued: “My gap year
helped me to realize that no one is stopping me from being the person I want to be but
myself.”
Daniel made meaning out of his experience in Israel by examining his spiritual
development, a deeply intrapersonal journey. When he decided to take a gap year, he had
hoped and expected to deepen his relationship with Judaism and spirituality. As he made the
transition to college, he recognized that his perspective was significantly impacted by the
encounters he had during his year in Israel. “In the religious community," said Daniel, "we
use a term called Hashkafo, which means like, I guess, the best way to translate it would be
world view, like your outlook on Judaism. And I definitely figured that out much more than
I had ever before … I think it [the year in Israel] definitely contributed to the way I perceive
things and my outlook on Judaism.” He added that another change was determining for
himself “how to maintain a religious lifestyle when you are not in an environment where it is
provided for you.” As he began to experience living religiously within the secular
environment of API, Daniel relied more intensively on his internal sense of what is important
and meaningful, explaining “if hadn’t gone to Israel, I wouldn’t have been enough prepared
to face the challenges I am facing right now religiously.”
123
Meaning Making: How They Changed
One of the questions posed to each participant during the initial interview was, “How
are you different now than you were before your gap year?” I wanted to hear the students
articulate any growth or change they had seen in themselves, or that they might report others
had noticed in them, as they started their college careers. This was a question that elicited a
number of insightful and contemplative responses, with evidence that a shift in meaning
making orientation had been hastened by their gap-year encounters.
For example, in response to this question, Paulina expressed an observation that,
since her gap year, she has a more secure sense of what is right for her. She said, “I’m
stronger. I know what I want. I know my values.” Paulina went on to explain that she had
been incorporating these closely-held values into the choices she was making in college, but
“not because my family or my country wants me to behave like that, like my culture wants
me to behave (laughs). So I’m pretty confident in who I am right now.”
While he did not express feeling significantly more confident, Vinny felt that he had
developed some different ways of approaching things during his gap year. He said his gap
year “was an experience that was . . . less learning about academic things and more learning
about worldly things.” When pressed to elaborate on what he had gained, he reflected that “I
think that just comes back to the motivation thing, like the emotional strength, like thinking
like I can handle anything that this year throws at me.”
Reflecting on her experience, Julie was certain that the encounters she had during her
gap year “forced me to draw upon an inner source of comfort in times of loneliness or
struggle.” She indicated that “I learned how to be self-sufficient and who I really am.”
124
Such change was clearly felt but difficult to define for Mark, who said that after his
gap year, others had commented that they noticed a change in him. “I don’t know if I have
become more mature or more easy-going or any number of other things,” said Mark. “All
that I know is that I am different.”
Jackie recognized that some of her personal development may have happened during
college even without taking a gap year, but she said “I think it just gave me like a very strong
sense of independence and, like, a conviction.” During her first semester in college, Jackie
felt more capable and self-assured in social situations than she had in high school, when she
was concerned about impressing others or fitting in to a social group. For Jackie, getting
away from the high school social scene for a year before starting college “felt very
empowering and self-affirming. Like, okay, this is me not in relation to just my setting or
everybody that I know. I just like feel like I know myself and I can be sure of that wherever I
go.”
Daniel reflected on his year as a process of gaining competence, and increasing his
awareness of himself in different contexts. “I think it was a very important year of change in
my life — both religiously and growing up, and developing a connection to Israel — that I
would not have otherwise, being able to live in a foreign country and being able to being my
own person there,” he said. “That is really cool to me, and I cannot have that experience in
any other way.”
In our final interview, Layla said that one of the most significant revelations she had
during her gap year was that she wants to pursue a "life serving others. I think that that’s like
the most important thing you can do, in my opinion. But I also recognized that, like, you
have to be doing it for, you know, for what you are doing not for recognition and I think
125
that’s, I think that I’ve come into a lot of that. That’s come up I think in my life here in many
ways, too.” By the start of the second semester, Layla had moved into some leadership roles
with titles, and she found it important to note that her decision to become in involved at that
level came from her desire to make contributions to her campus community, and that she was
“not doing things to get recognition,” she said.
Layla said she recognized that “a lot of people go from high school to college because
that’s like what they’re supposed to do, and they never stopped to think ‘well, why am I
doing this?’ And I had a whole year thinking about it.” She added, “I think that being here is
not just part of a plan, it’s like an active choice that I make like every day, and then I love it.
Like, I love it and I want to make it last as long as I can possibly make it last.”
Paulina commented, during her September interview, that “I think that a year was
really helpful for me, because I kind of grew up from being that kid at high school that had to
depend on all of these other people that didn’t like her, and how to fit in and how to behave
in a certain way because she had to, to start discovering, ‘okay, who is [Paulina], what do I
care about, what is really important for me?’”
In her written reflections in December, Lena shared that while she had always been
concerned about the plight of people in American cities, her gap year helped her identify
what she cares about most. “Those things are structural oppression, urban education, and
other urban social issues. I don’t think I would have felt comfortable talking about or
studying race in America to the extent that I have this semester and expect to as an Africana
concentrator if I hadn’t taken my gap year and worked in a predominantly Black community
and school. I feel a strong sense of being able to relate to people across social categories, and
that’s because I did so much of that last year."
126
In our final interview, Jackie said: “And I think also I had all these assumptions
about, like, ‘oh, well, that’s not my thing, I haven’t expressed past interest in it so I can’t
express interest in it now.’ And I think doing my gap year was just very much like proving
to myself, like, No. If you want to do something else, do it. It doesn’t matter that you
haven’t done it before; you can just go do it, like you don’t have to be pre-qualified for
everything that you do in life. And I think it just helped me to understand that if you’re
interested in something, you can do it. You don’t have to be have doing it for the past five
years.”
One of Jackie's comments in her written reflection was perhaps the most insightful
and reflective of all of the participants, showing a high degree of self-authorship that she
attributed to her gap year:
This is the greatest thing I have learned. I just need to make a move to become the
person I want to be – my identity is not at the whim of what I feel others have
encouraged or wanted me to be. I think I felt that way through a lot of high school. I
thought that if I did this or that, people would think I was trying to be someone I
wasn’t, or not being genuine. I had a big fear of that.
The students also maintained that they are able to value college more holistically,
with a focus on their own intellectual and personal growth, feeling fortunate that they had the
chance to take advantage of the many opportunities and resources that are available on their
campuses. Many expressed feeling grateful and appreciative for the privilege of being in
college.
127
CHAPTER SIX: SOVEREIGN ENGAGEMENT IN COLLEGE
Introduction
As a result of the Meaning Making that emerges from the Encounters students have
during their gap year, they arrive at college ready to approach their first year with gusto.
Some prevalent themes emerged from the process of coding the interview, focus group, and
written response data. While not every student arrives feeling academically confident, or
emotionally prepared, to attend college, all the participants in this study indicated they felt
ready to begin the next chapter in their lives. In particular, there was compelling evidence in
the students' descriptions of their transition to college during the first year that they had
developed an ability to rely on their stronger internal voices, which had been cultivated
through their gap-year encounters.
Evidence of Sovereign Engagement in College
Students make the most pronounced growth in self-authorship during gap years that
challenge them to make decisions and handle the consequences; when they are pushed to a
greater level of independence than they had in high school; when they have the chance to
interact with people of different ages and backgrounds. This, in turn, leads to an approach to
the first year of college that I have termed “Sovereign Engagement.”
128
The term “Sovereign Engagement” is intended to capture a dimension of student
experience that reflects the significance of having stepped off that proverbial conveyor belt:
the move away from the conventional educational path and into encounters that were clearly
developmentally provocative for them. “Sovereign Engagement” refers to self-authored
understanding and behavior, in which individuals find meaning and validation within
themselves and cease basing their decisions on external messages and social scripts. Having
spent a year removed from prior habits, social groups, and cultural contexts, gap-year
students demonstrate a keenly deliberate approach to their decisions when they began their
first year in college. They are able to recognize this as a new phase of their experience, and
one that they have reached intentionally, rather than by default. In most cases, they are also
able to articulate with acuity how they intended to make the most of their first year.
In developing the term “Sovereign Engagement,” I was inspired by Walker Percy's
classic essay, The Loss of the Creature (1975). In this essay, Percy explores his concept of
sovereignty of the knower, exhorting educators and students to avoid the tendency to yield a
level of authentic knowing to an outside expert who crafts or provides the context for what
we know. Using the example of a sightseer visiting the Grand Canyon for the first time,
Percy suggests that there is a danger that the traveler will “surrender the present to the past or
future,” by comparing the experience to others’ accounts of the Grand Canyon, rather than
engaging with “the thing to be known” (Percy, p. 48), such as truly seeing the Grand Canyon
in all its remarkable dimensions. “Sovereign Engagement” as a descriptive term honors the
way that the students in this study have chosen not to surrender the present to the past or the
future, but who have become what Percy refers to as “sovereign wayfarers,” engaging
enthusiastically in the things they want to know. For them, “Sovereign Engagement” means
129
these students take full ownership of their choices and their performance, without
consternation or blame. Additional information about Percy’s essay, and its relevance to this
topic, is included as Appendix I.
In the Gap Year Impact Model, Sovereign Engagement indicates a number of
representative behaviors and attitudes that reflect both the developmentally-effective gapyear Encounters and the Meaning Making that ensued. Despite some variation in their
specific activities and the level of self-authorship they achieved, all twelve of the students in
my study demonstrated attitudes or behaviors in each of the categories that this aspect of the
model suggests. The following pages offer examples of how these students:
• Took responsibility for their academic performance;
• Appreciated learning for the sake of learning;
• Pursued authentic relationships with parents and peers;
• Recognized and resisted FOMO (“Fear of Missing Out”);
• Valued college as short-term and a privilege; and
• Made decisions congruent with their internal voice.
Analysis of the data in terms of students' adjustment to college revealed evidence of
the most significant growth in the students who had had the widest range of gap-year
encounters. That is, when their encounters pushed them in multiple dimensions, and
especially when those encounters were markedly different than what they are likely to have
experienced had they moved directly from high school to the first year of college, they
described the most significant change in themselves. As the Gap Year Impact Model shown
in Figure 4b suggests, this led to an acceleration in the process of self-authorship, and to
evidence of “Sovereign Engagement” in their college experience.
130
While most of the students were extremely excited about finally getting to college
after having been engaged in other activities for a year, for several the transition was,
according to their own assessment, made more difficult in some ways by having taken the
gap year. Specifically, some felt unprepared or out of practice academically, some were
missing the people and experiences from their gap year, and others felt just plain
apprehensive about starting college. It is often a sense of liminality, of existing between
worlds, that makes the transition to college more complicated for some gap-year students.
Having moved to more complex levels of meaning making as a result of their gap-year
Encounters, these students showed increased self-authorship in college, as the following
pages demonstrate.
Taking Responsibility for Academic Performance
Whatever their level of academic preparedness, the students in this study took
responsibility for their academic performance in their college courses. For Andy, the gap
year made the transition to college very difficult because he had not been academically
engaged during the previous year. Andy attitude was ambivalent, at best, when he began the
Fall semester. He said, “it was tough going back to academics and partially because I forgot
the material, partially because I wasn’t super into it, partially because I was just sort of not
used to the rigor of like focusing on classes and doing homework after not doing that for a
while.”
In November, during one of the Google hangout focus groups, Andy said, “I think I
would be a much better student if I hadn’t taken the gap year … I feel like the gap year kind
of unconditioned me from focusing on my school work.” Andy felt that he had outside
131
responsibilities that demanded his time and attention, and felt more important than his
coursework. "And then also just like the focus and then also having like motivation to do
things that sometimes I am not as interested in can be tough, especially when I have
something that I am very interested in that I could be spending time on.”
The transition to college-level academics was also difficult for Daniel. During our
final interview, Daniel reflected on his academic performance, which he felt was not up to
par. "I am struggling to pass my classes and these people are developing apps and curing
cancer, this is like a fairly common among API freshmen, is that there are people coming in
who have already done these amazing things." He observed his sense that others were able to
get good grades without a great deal of effort, and his need to accept that reality, as he
perceived it. "The idea, the fact that there are people like that and I struggle just to get by
like that and that's really hard, so I think that’s a low, and I am continuing to feel this, I don’t
think that's going to change, I am never going to be on the top third of intelligence of API or
even the top half probably, so it's just feeling that, that’s hard."
Daniel had to pause during the first semester and think about whether his academic
performance should be the most important measure. He said, “I need to realize from the
outset that I am not going to be an A student here. And when I get those tests back next
week and they are not – and I didn't get As on that, and I am probably and hopefully pass
them, that's the goal, passing is the goal.” He hoped that once he decided on his major and
began taking more specialized courses, he might try to improve his grades a bit, “but these
are my goals right now and I think that for me is a very, very new idea because I was never a
B student. I probably got one B if anything at all in high school. He added, “That's very
new but it's also I think it's healthy. I think failing is a healthy thing to do at some point in
132
life.” Arriving at college after a gap year also required students like Daniel to recalibrate, as
they left behind some conditions that had supported their process of development.
Not all of their decisions necessarily resulted in the students’ academic success. In
fact, several of the participants talked about choosing not to put their energy into a particular
course because it felt less important than some other priorities. And others had to come to
terms with a different set of initial courses than they might otherwise have taken, or a level of
performance on the first round of graded work that was not consistent with their previous
achievement. Vinny, for example, seemed unfazed by his final grade of B in Chemistry,
though he accepted full responsibility for that outcome. “It was just a B. That was my
lowest grade and I was just disinterested. I had no interest in the class and didn't try really
because I didn't have any motivation to try.”
While she did have motivation to try hard during her first semester, Maria was not
disappointed about her early performance in her courses at API. She also did not mind
taking some courses that were essentially review for her, saying, “if I had come straight here
from high school, I would have tried to transfer credit for my advanced classes and probably
would not have done as well, since I would not have remembered all of the foundational
material in the advanced classes. Seeing this material again, I understand it much better and
also understand the reasons behind the laws and theorems that I see.”
The initial adjustment was difficult for Lena, who took all humanities courses during
her first semester, so found herself saddled with 500 pages of reading each week. In one
class, she found that the first assignment “has had me so scared and stressed for the past four
days, it’s just so hard. And I just feel really stupid because I, like, can’t figure out how to
write it in the right way.”
133
Similarly, Layla reflected during our final interview on her experience of writing
papers during her first semester. She found that her writing skills had been “rusty,” and that
her writing at the beginning of her first college semester “was not as good as the writing that
I did at the end of my senior year.” This was difficult for Layla, “especially because I felt
like it wasn’t as hard for my friends, since they had just come out of high school and it was
easy for them. So they would write a paper in one night or two nights, and I would spend
like the whole week working on them.”
After spending time away from school during her gap year, with infrequent practice
speaking and using English, Paulina had some difficulty making the transition to her first
year of college, which she described during our initial interview. “When I came [to SC], the
transition between the Spanish and English was kind of difficult.” She laughed as she talked
about getting accustomed to using and hearing English, both in interactions with peers and in
her classes. Paulina’s parents accompanied her to campus and stayed local for her first
several days at SC, she explained, “so I had to fix my brain to both of the languages at the
same time.”
When Mark arrived, he found himself somewhat intimidated by the other students in
his classes first semester. Despite his confidence in his high school English class, he found
that in his English class at SC, “people were saying what I thought were the smartest things,
and I had no idea what to say about it.” When he got to SC, said Mark, “I was like, damn,
people are smart!”
134
Learning for the Sake of Learning
Wherever the students landed on the spectrum of academic performance, the value of
learning for the sake of learning became a thread of connection among the participants. For
example, Tessa was energized by her courses in the first semester at API, and she expressed
her frustration with other students’ obsession with grades and exams. “I don’t care if I got
this grade versus that grade if I learn to approach a problem in a new way and think about it
in a different way,” said Tessa. “And I want to. That’s why I am here, not necessarily for
the grades.”
This same sentiment was expressed by Layla, who said during our first interview
(before she had even completed graded work in her Fall classes) that “above all, I am here for
the knowledge to be gained from my classes. Hopefully, I will absorb and display that
knowledge in such a way that it leads to good grades, but for me grades are a by-product of
the learning, not the other way around.”
Despite the fact that he had been completely away from school during his gap year,
Vinny was very excited about his courses when he began his first semester at SC. In fact, by
the end of his gap year, “I was really like, man, I wanna be in class right now. And that was
just a feeling I hadn’t had in years, like I haven’t wanted to go to class and been excited for
school in so long, really.”
During our final interview, Vinny talked enthusiastically about his academic
experience in the first semester, explaining that he had not struggled academically despite the
fact that he had not done homework or written a paper for a full year. “But then I got into the
swing of things just pretty immediately,” said Vinny. “I was engaged in most of the things I
135
was doing – especially this semester all my classes, even more, I take them specifically
because I wanted to see what they are about and all that stuff, it's cool.”
Jackie enjoyed virtually everything about her first semester, and was delighted that
her deep engagement with the learning process resulted in excellent grades. “I’m quite proud
of the academic products and of how much I learned, as well as my grades,” Jackie wrote in
December. “But the reason I loved finals was definitely not the grades I earned—they are
just a happy side benefit.” And Paulina summed up her sense of the value of learning for the
sake of learning in a straightforward way, explaining that “the gap year gave me the
perspective that success is not measured in grades, but measured in knowledge and
experience.”
Viewing College as Short-Term and a Privilege
With an interim year of encounters behind them, students sensed that college was an
important next phase of their lives, but also recognized the relatively brief portion it
represents. They began their first year valuing college as short-term and a privilege. Layla
summed it up particularly well; it was her gap year that allowed Layla to recognize that “four
years is a long time to be in college, but at the same time it’s very short in, like, your
lifespan. So I have this sort of dual perception of like college is now, and college is
important, but it’s also temporary, and there’s a lot of life that will happen after college as
well. So that kinda makes me wanna like really appreciate where I am and like get the most
out of it, for sure.” This was also a theme for Julie, who described college as a “temporal
bubble,” and said “you know, both in a good way and in a bad way, like its temporary, this
isn’t real life. I am trying to say, like, awareness of the shortness of college.”
136
Students seemed to recognize and appreciate the passage of time in new ways as a
result of their gap-year experiences. Many of them felt that through their gap-year
encounters, they had learned to slow down, to appreciate the moment, to pay attention to and
take pride in their decisions. Simultaneously, they expressed recognition that there was more
to come beyond college.
Mark attributed some of his appreciation for the relative short span of time that
college represents to his NOLS course. He explained that “one of the things that they say is,
‘slow days, fast weeks,’ where like the days go by really slowly but then you will realize that,
shit, it's Monday again. So I realized you don't realize how fast time is moving.” He found it
important to live in the present, and tried to remember “that don’t forget about what's in front
of you type deal.” Andy’s perspective, however, was somewhat different. His feelings about
spending time in college were related to his restlessness during his first year. “I do feel like
college is something I am doing right now,” said Andy, “but it’s not the be-all, end-all, and if
something else came up that is more important then I can go to that.”
“I am enjoying every minute that I am here really but I do view it as kind of a
stepping stone,” Tessa said during our final interview. She explained that each segment of
her life so far seemed to follow a natural sequence, “but it’s not like I can’t see past college.
It’s not like I am not conscious of the fact that this is one more step but there is stuff that
comes afterwards.” To Maria, arriving at college “feels like a new phase of my life instead
of a continuation of the last fourteen years of education.”
While their first-year peers were treating college as the most important part of their
lives, these students had a different perspective. “I don’t want college to be the best four
years of my life,” said Layla.
137
Letting Go of “FOMO”
The students use the term “Fear of Missing Out” — commonly known as FOMO —
to describe the sense that others around you must be doing something better, or more
exciting, and that if you don’t participate you will be missing out on something vitally
important that others will share. This concept was explored spontaneously by several
participants, especially notable because I had not introduced the term in my questions.
Rather, several of the students discussed either some FOMO tension they felt during the first
year (wanting to do what they wanted, but also wondering if they might be missing out on
something else) or outright resistance to FOMO (preferring to choose to do something with
friends rather than attend some party that had gotten a lot of hype, for example). The ability
to recognize, and in many instances, resist FOMO, developed out of the self-reliance and
cultural dissonance students had faced during their gap years. After spending a year in
Turkey, for example, Jackie recognized that “what I learned [during my gap year] was how
to be outside of the system … not buy in to all the cultural norms and cultural rules of a given
society.” This is compelling evidence of students cultivating the internal voice, a key
element of the Crossroads of Self-Authorship as described by Baxter Magolda (2004, 2009).
The students who did discuss FOMO, for the most part, found themselves opting into
the events that they found interesting, and also just as frequently choosing to spend time
alone or with a select group of friends when a larger or more well-publicized event was less
appealing to them. They also were able to attribute their decisions to their ability to listen to
their internal voices.
138
Many students in this study spent all or part of their gap year engaged in very
independently-driven activities within some new cultural contexts. They had traveled or
lived on their own, or were responsible for shopping for groceries or managing their finances.
In some instances, they became commuters, or punched a clock at work, or designed lessons
and activities for children who relied on them. Through these encounters, students began to
recognize themselves as both independent and interdependent. In some ways, coming to
college resulted in a loss of independence for these gap-year students, a shift that was at once
both welcome and unwelcome.
While she was in DC, Lena cooked all her own vegan meals, so adjusting to eating in
a campus dining hall was difficult. It brought on feelings of loss of control that she hadn’t
expected. According to Maria, however, the gap year helped her to feel more independent
and capable. “And just more mature,” she said. “Like, I understand that — yes — it could
cost three bucks to do a load of laundry and — yeah — cooking for yourself is hard when
you cook for one person. And I know how to cook.”
As a result of his experiences, Peter also was able to make connections between what
he was studying and what he had encountered in the real world. During one of the focus
groups, Peter talked about the way he was thinking about material being covered in his
Political Science class at DU. “I feel like I can relate to it much more, just because I’ve seen
more parts of the world, and, just having seen more — just one year more of reality and not
just of the school world.”
When Paulina did poorly on an exam early in the first semester, she decided that she
needed to increase her efforts to take advantage of campus academic support resources. She
briefly felt upset about her performance, but as a result of her gap year, Paulina said, “I
139
learned life is like that, college is like that. Now I have experience and know how to handle
it, I know how to get help even if I didn't before, I know now what my strengths are, and I
know that I don’t want that to happen anymore.”
In contrast to some others involved in this study, Mark, who had lived at home for the
latter half of his gap year, found that arriving at college gave him a tremendous feeling of
freedom. “The best thing is the freedom I have to do pretty much whatever I want.” During
the summer before his gap year began, a coworker who was already in college asked Mark if
he felt sad that he wasn’t going to be starting college in the fall. “I remember saying, like,
I’m not necessarily sad, but like I told him that everyone always says college is the best, and
like, I just wanna find out why they keep saying that,” remembers Mark. This coworker
emphasized the feeling of freedom in college, telling Mark that he would enjoy making
decisions without having to clear it with anyone else — like opting into spontaneous plans.
“You can always be like, ‘Yes. I want to go to McDonald’s at 2:45 in the morning.’”
Although this had been alluring to him, Mark said during our final interview that he
had not gone to McDonald’s at 2:45 in the morning. However, he said, “I just like being able
to go wherever I want whenever I want.”
The concept of FOMO, then, is related to fluctuating levels of freedom and
responsibility. As they negotiate this new environment, it is appealing, several admit, to slide
back into the comfort of defined standards for their thought and behavior. Nice, too, to live
among so many peers and to have, in most cases, fewer responsibilities than they had had
during their gap year. This sometimes meant that students struggled in response to strong
external influences, evidence of some peer pressure that had not plagued them during the gap
year.
140
Tessa was one of the students who was very cognizant of the FOMO phenomenon.
Her take on fear of missing out was that she should make choices consistent with her own
desires, rather than what others might think. She also recognized that her approach to FOMO
was different than what she had observed in other first-year students at API. In our final
interview, Tessa shared, “People will joke around, like, I am having such FOMO right now, I
should be doing XYZ. But, why should you be doing it, if you don’t really want to?”
While other students seemed to have successfully cultivated their internal voice, Lena
seemed to be truly vacillating between several approaches to decisions in her life, and
sometimes conflicted about what is right for her. At the start of the spring semester, Lena
reflected on the tension she was feeling, because she was able to observe the social pressures
on first-year students and at the same time step back to make sense of her reactions to what is
going on around her. “Okay, here it is,” said Lena, after struggling to find a way of
describing this tension, “this semester [I’ve experienced] sort of like an intense fear of
missing out and also like sometimes if I’m not paying attention, I tend to really let social
pressures act on me in a way that I am not always happy with.” Her description perfectly
captured the essence of FOMO: “I feel like I should go out tonight so I guess I’m going to
go out tonight, but maybe I would rather stay in. Or, I feel like I should go to this event or I
feel like what I’m supposed to be doing in college is this.”
The ability to recognize, and at times resist, the pressure of FOMO illustrates that
these students were feeling some tension between being a ‘typical’ college student and at the
same time drawing on their recent gap-year experiences. As a result, they felt they were less
likely than other students to be swayed by the opinions of others. Noticing the culture of
141
social pressure in college, the students felt that their year of “real life” provided a stronger
platform for making good, internally-driven decisions.
Pursuit of Authentic Relationships
As discussed in Chapter Two, the relational-cultural model identifies four growthfostering components of relational health — mutual engagement, authenticity, empowerment,
and ability to deal with conflict (Liang, et al., 2002a; 2007). Because students chose an
alternative path than their high school peers, I wondered how those existing relationships
would evolve, and how the students would pursue new relationships when they entered the
college environment after having had the gap year. In other words, I wanted to know in what
ways their relational health had been impacted by their gap year. The building and
maintenance of relationships before, during and after the gap year was a common thread
through many of the stories that were shared with me by the student participants.
Three primary perspectives on evolving relationships emerged from the data:
1. Existing relationships with high school friends, mentors, and family members had
changed through the processes of deciding to go, pursuing the gap year, and then starting
college;
2. Multigenerational relationships during the gap year had expanded or awakened
students' capacity for interpersonal connection; and
3. Emerging relationships with people they met during the first year of college,
especially with traditional first-year students, other gap-year students, and upperclass
students, were a welcome and empowering part of their transition.
142
Across these relationship categories, it was evident that the students’ relational health
was tied in large part to their levels of self-authorship, and that this impacted the
relationships they maintained and developed during college. Of the growth-fostering
components of relational health, the one that was most consistently evident in their comments
was authenticity. In fact, the greater their reliance on an internal voice, the more likely the
students were to describe actively seeking authenticity in their relationships once they got to
college. This finding is also quite consistent with Bowman’s 2010 study on the
psychological well-being of first-year college students (described in Chapter Two), which
identified such contributing factors as autonomous decision-making and maintaining positive
relations with others. It has been suggested that when relationships are strong, students are
likely to adjust more readily to college, since “authentic and empowering relational
connections may serve a protective function for college students in helping them cope with
attachment insecurity and decreased parental emotional support” (Frey, et al., 2006, p. 306).
These gap-year students arrive don college campuses having already negotiated some shifts
in their existing relationships, along with the experience of fostering and nurturing new
relationships. In other words, they had had more opportunity than their peers to consider
themselves in relation to others.
The most obvious thread of continuity about relationships throughout this study is the
desire for authenticity in relationships, apparent in the reflections of all participants. This
was evident in the way students talked about their relationships with their family members,
with their existing friends from high school, with individuals they met through their gap-year
encounters, and with those they once they began their first year of college. The “Meaning
Making” process, depicted in the Gap Year Impact Model as a series of overlapping cycles of
143
differentiation and integration, captures the students’ recognition of their deepening
relationships. This reflects the interpersonal growth that was hastened by the students' gapyear Encounters (exploring the question “How Do I Relate to Others?”), and is evident in the
way students describe their relationships once they get to college. The students frequently
described themselves in relation to others, and identified their relationships as pivotal aspects
of their adjustment during the first year.
Authenticity in Existing Relationships
In terms of changing relationships with high school friends, mentors, and family
members, the processes of deciding to go, pursuing the gap year, and then starting college
caused a shift in relationships for the participants in this study. As described in the Gap Year
Impact Model, the process of decision-making related to the gap year required a level of
individual motivation that in many cases brought new dimension to relationships with
parents, in particular. Choosing this unconventional path also meant that these students had
to talk with their friends and teachers about their conviction that taking a gap year was right
for them, regardless of the reactions they might have received. In addition, conversations
about the viability of the gap year required students to articulate their intentions, demonstrate
their persistence and attention to details, and negotiate finances in consultation with parents
or other adults. This is initial evidence of moving toward self-authorship, which we have
seen develops more fully through students’ gap-year Encounters.
Lena remembers that, before she began the gap year, her high school friends had been
concerned that “‘you’re not gonna be interested in being friends with us anymore cause
you’re gonna change so much.’” She found that, given the intensity of her teaching
144
experience with City Year, her focus during the year was not on making many new friends.
When she returned and headed off to DU, her high school friendships were still strong,
despite the fact that most of those friends had cultivated new relationships with people they
had met in college.
Some students saw their relationships with family members evolve and, in some
cases, improve. Perhaps because they were in different places for the first time, Daniel and
his twin brother ended up speaking on the phone frequently and “he wanted to know what
was going on in my life, and I wanted to know what was going on in his life, because we
were both going through very new and very different experiences.” Similarly, when she
returned from the overseas portion of her gap year, Layla felt that her relationship with her
family had changed. “I think that my parents have begun to respect my autonomy, like as
they probably should, considering I lived on my own for 5 months,” she said, adding that her
relationships with her siblings had changed as well. She also made an effort to express more
appreciation of the things her parents did for her and her siblings.
Authenticity in Relationships During the Gap Year
All students left behind some relationships and developed new ones as the result of
the gap year. Particularly prevalent in their stories were significant multi-generational
relationships. In fact, 11 of the 12 students spent a significant portion of their gap year in an
experience or environment where the majority of the people they interacted with on a daily
basis were not their peers in terms of age. All 12 participants left the realm of a familiar,
peer-driven school context and entered unfamiliar spaces and environments in which they
were establishing and strengthening new relationships. They were interacting regularly with
145
coworkers, children, host families, supervisors, and/or grandparents, whose influences were
deeply felt by the students. As they pursued these new relationships, students gained the
perspective that comes from knowing and understanding the world through the eyes of
someone new. Their increased self-authorship — especially in terms of interpersonal
development — certainly comes in part from these relationships. The relationships seem to
have been essential catalysts for the cycles of differentiation and integration that were so
central to the students’ experiences. Also evident in their descriptions of these relationships
was a sense of gratitude and respect for the people they met.
Paulina spent part of her gap year living with her grandparents, so became very close
with them, and at the same time found that while she was away, her relationship with her
parents shifted. This became clearer to Paulina once she arrived at SC. “Now I depend less
upon them, yeah, in my decisions I don’t depend on them that much, I have learned to make
my own decisions. I depend them in the way that I talk to them because they are my family
but I feel that I can handle more by myself, my life.”
While Layla was interning at a non-profit agency, she developed a close friendship
with another intern who was 28, ten years older than Layla. She lived with a host family
during part of her time in India, and also spent her days working with people from different
generations at various times. “There was one woman who was like 50 – maybe she was
closer to 60 – so it was diverse, even though the median age was probably like early 20’s.”
While she was there, Layla also worked in an after-school program for young girls, playing
games and teaching them some basic science and English, learning to work with children and
gaining important cross-cultural insights about elementary education. She had very few
interactions with people her own age during her gap year.
146
 When she got to college, Layla was able to reflect on how those relationships had
been important to her, even as she appreciated her new peers. “I’m glad that I did it, and I
think that it definitely helped me mature in a lot of ways, but it’s also nice to just be able to
be with the people of your same age,” Layla said during our focus group discussion.
Several of the students had experiences living with host families, and those
Encounters were important to their development even when they were not the most satisfying
or supportive. For example, for several months Maria lived with a couple whose children
were grown and had moved out of the house, so she felt rather lonely while she was there.
Toward the end of her stay, however, she began frequenting a local cafe that served
American food, and developed a meaningful relationship with one of the regular staff
members. Maria explained that eventually this individual “was like a surrogate dad to me. I
ate Thanksgiving with the people from the café, I had Christmas dinner there – it was just a
lot of fun.”
Andy also noticed the difference being among peers when he arrived at API. He
shared with other participants during our focus group that “I was working at this awesome
company with a bunch of people who I do like, but they were all in their 20s and 30s.” In
addition to those relationships, he spent the year living with some family friends and getting
to know them better. He felt that they became a second family to him over the course of the
year.
These relationships across generational lines proved to be deeply meaningful to the
students. The students became close with individuals they met, learning to appreciate their
varied perspectives, and often finding them to be refreshingly genuine.
147
Authenticity in New Relationships
When they arrive at college after the gap year, first-year students have the chance to
form new relationships with peers and others on campus. With the exception of Daniel, who
was surrounded by his peers during his gap year, the participants found themselves both
pleased and unnerved by immersion into a peer-focused environment. The tension of
in(ter)dependence described by Smith, et al. (2006) as a common aspect of socialization for
first-year college students seems to play out in complex ways for gap-year students.
Even as they appreciated entering a community of peers who may share their interests
and enthusiasm for being in college, many participants in this study noticed differences
between themselves and the other first-year students they met. For instance, when she met
other first-year students during her first semester at SC, Paulina noticed a difference in terms
of their most recent frames of reference. She said, “everyone is comparing high school with
college, and I’m not comparing high school with college." In Paulina's mind, high school
was far behind in her past, “so it is weird like when they are talking about their proms.” She
added that, when first-year college students start talking about high school, they are holding
onto their own “little world” -- one which Paulina felt she had left behind much earlier. Lena
seemed to agree with Paulina. In describing her decision to break up with a young man she
met at DU who seemed unable to manage his time and commitments, she commented that “I
think that I’m definitely more mature than most of the other freshmen that I know.”
These students commented on the fact that, once they arrived at college after the gap
year, they valued that they were able to select their friends, rather than being thrown into
relationships because of either convenience or luck. For example, in September, Peter was
thinking about how he could make meaningful friendships at DU, a much larger community
148
than his high school of 200 students. He found it distasteful that most of his early friendships
were “interactions determined by chance,” and spent time evaluating his satisfaction with
those relationships. “But I realized here that you can influence or choose who you will
interact with by creating filters,” he shared. “So, by choosing which classes you take, which
clubs you do, which activities you do, you create filters and then you meet people there, and
then to me it seems okay to become friends with them because that filter brought you
together.”
Julie felt that she was approaching relationships in college differently than she sensed
her peers were. Thinking back on first semester, she said, “I was really conscious about it. I
was trying to learn from all my friends, and if it is not someone who is feeding me as much
as I feel like I am feeding into the relationship, then maybe it’s not a good relationship.”
Julie also reflected on her approach to relationships, which she felt had become more
nuanced and deliberate. She referred to high school friends as “friends of convenience,” and
explained that her time in Turkey was far less social than college had been during her first
semester. College, said Julie, is “awesome, it’s so much fun, and they’re your own age, and
so they want to do the same things. So I feel like I’ve just been aware of that, of what maybe
a real friendship is, so I’ve found some people that I really consider real friends at DU so
far.” Rather than seeking to get to know a particular group of people, Julie indicated that was
intentional about meeting people “that are going to push me to be a better person, and help
me be a better and more mature person. And so that’s how I look for my friends.”
When she got to API, Tessa also found herself looking for meaningful friendships,
and beginning to let go of some high school friendships. “Well, when you get some distance
from people you realize, I don’t know -- it sounds bad, but you realize who you are friends
149
with because of proximity, and who you are friends with based upon real reasons." Although
she had remained in touch with many high school friends during her gap year, Tessa began to
realize that "for the most part I am in contact with my other friends not because I feel like I
have to be but because I want to be, while the other people who I might have not realized that
I was friends with just because they are all the same circle, I don’t really feel guilty about
kind of letting those slide.”
The students also found themselves to be socially confident. During the focus
groups, student participants agreed with one another that they had arrived at college with a
greater facility than most of their peers to interact with strangers. Their personal stories
reveal that during their gap years, developing and/or cultivating relationships with new
people, especially those from different generations, required them to hone their interpersonal
skills. They brought this confidence with them to college. Julie, who had spent her gap year
in Turkey, offered a commentary that describes not just her experience, but many others, at
least metaphorically, as well: “I’m in my native tongue, my native culture. I know the rules
here. I know the rules, and I can break the rules if I want to, here.”
Andy appreciated the multigenerational relationships he had had during his gap year,
but found it exciting to join a community of his peers when he got to college. “It’s really
cool for me to be able to be here and just, like, have relationships with people who are my
age and just be a mature college student sometimes. I like that,” he said during the focus
group.
During the first semester, Maria was not hesitant to talk to new people. She said, “If
I don’t know anyone in the room, I’ll pick the friendliest-looking person in the room that’s
sitting by themselves and sit in front of them. So I got to know a lot of people that way.”
150
Similarly, social confidence played out for Julie who said, “I was comfortable talking
to everyone and I was disregarding the social rules of ‘you are captain of the crew team …
oh, I could never talk to you.’ I don’t care. I just came back from a foreign country where
everyone was a lot more scary.”
Coupled with confidence was a sense of gratitude. “My friends did not have the kind
of experiences I did, but that makes them no less exceptional,” said Layla, “and I am
constantly learning and growing from them. The best thing about [Satis], in my opinion, is
that everyone here is so smart and so curious.”
Sharing Their Stories
As they developed new relationships, one tension revolved around the extent to which
the students shared their gap-year stories with students around them. During the data
gathering phase of this study, the students were most animated and engaged when they were
discussing the encounters they had during the gap year. It was evident that they had had few
opportunities to describe their activities in great detail, and in fact some explained that their
peers did not seem particularly interested. Several students expressed a deep desire to talk
about what they felt were extremely significant encounters during their gap year, and
appreciated the chance to talk about their experiences.
There was also some ambivalence among the participants about when and how
comprehensively to discuss the gap year. In some cases, students were concerned that
talking about their gap year would somehow create distance between themselves and others
they met when they arrived at college. Layla explained that, at the start of her first semester,
151
“I was very cautious. I’m very aware of it, because I don’t wanna be that person — that,
‘oh, like that girl that went to India’ — I don’t want to talk about it all the time.”
A similar concern about not wanting to sound arrogant by talking about the gap year
was raised by Jackie, whose gap year included spending several months in two different
European countries. She explained that she found it awkward to have other students think
she was “cool” or “amazing” for doing something that she recognized was a privilege, and
she didn’t want to draw attention to herself because of it. As a matter of fact, Jackie felt
uncomfortable being praised for having spent a year in Europe after high school. “That’s not
a reflection on me,” said Jackie, “that’s a reflection of me being really lucky.”
In contrast to Layla and Jackie, Vinny did not feel concerned about disclosing the fact
that he had taken a gap year. He was comfortable with his choices and did not feel at all selfconscious. Vinny said, “It’s not really a secret or anything at all, it’s just something that
comes up. And it’s not, like, important – I mean it’s not important to tell other people … it
doesn’t change their perception of me or anything -- it’s just a little thing, a little tidbit of
information.”
For Maria, mention of the gap year came up frequently in conversation at the
beginning of the year, often because API students would often discuss their courses, which
were heavily dependent upon placement results at the start of the semester. Although she had
taken advanced math courses, including calculus, during high school, Maria placed into an
introductory calculus course when she arrived at API. Maria explained, “I’m taking [this
course] because I took a gap year and forgot most everything.’” She added, “It’s like ‘yes, I
had these classes, but I took a gap year,’ and then they’re like, ‘what did you do in your gap
152
year?’ And then . . . I mean I’ve had this conversation probably 30 times in the last three
weeks.”
Peter felt that most people he met were not particularly interested in knowing the
details of his gap year. When it came up in conversation as he met people during the first
semester, students would ask, ‘What did you do?,’ in a rather perfunctory way, so Peter had
formulated what he called a “standard sentence” in response. He explained that he no longer
spent much time formulating his answer, but just repeated the rehearsed sentence. He added,
"The interesting thing is that regardless of what you say in the sentence, they are not going to
say anything anyway. I think … the standard response is that people don't really care very
much."
Lena felt that her gap-year experience – teaching at an inner-city middle school –
shaped her tremendously, and yet, during her first semester at DU she sometimes felt unsure
about whether or when to bring it up with others. She said, “I think it comes up earlier if the
person is older.” When she met an upperclass student, Lena, realized, she was more likely to
mention the gap year to provide a frame of reference for her age and situation. “I don’t
always want to do that, but that is my impulse when I meet people that are older.” She went
on to explain that, while she often hesitated to call attention to the fact that she took a gap
year, “… it’s a big piece of the context, and who I am right now. It maybe won’t be in a few
years, but for now it definitely really is.”
Mark shared a similar concern at the start of his first semester at SC. When asked at
what point he might tell someone he met about his gap year, he responded, “I never force it
into the conversation.” However, if there was a natural reason to share a story that made it
feel relevant and appropriate, “I’ll say, like, ‘so I took a gap year, and I went on a camping
153
trip there, and during that trip this happened.’” He added that “most of the people that I hang
out with know that I took a gap year, just from talking with them.”
For Tessa, her gap year often came up when her peers at API were discussing
something relating to high school, or relating to their ages. “It’s interesting because
sometimes I will say, ‘Oh, did you hear?, right, some people do it,’ or they will say ‘what did
you do?’ and I will say ‘teaching,’ and then it will end there.” When she did get some
follow-up questions, Tessa would elaborate “based on the person’s interest or if they are
asking for more details.”
In deciding when or whether to disclose details of their gap years, these students were
concerned that they might appear smug, or sound arrogant (despite the fact that, as Layla put
it, they were sometimes reminded by others not to think they are better than anyone else
because they took a gap year). As they sought to develop and redefine authentic
relationships with others, the students found themselves negotiating the liminality of listening
to (perhaps presumed) external voices and trusting their internal voices. When their
relationships provided more of the indicators of relational health, students were more likely
to feel comfortable fully disclosing their gap-year stories.
Making Decisions Congruent with Internal Voice
What Paulina recognized when she got to college was that she had become more sure
of herself, and of her values, as a result of the gap year. “I’m stronger. I know what I want.
I know my values, the values that I respect, so I know how to behave, because I want to
behave like that, and I know that is correct for me.” This realization made her more certain
about her own sense of right and wrong, which she felt was independent of her upbringing
154
and the cultural context in which she was raised. Her choices were made because of her
internal voice, and “not because my family or my country wants me to behave like that, like,
my culture wants me to behave. So I’m pretty confident (with) who I am right now.” Like
Paulina, Lena felt she was making decisions and setting goals that were consistent with her
greater understanding of herself. “I’m a lot more articulated and focused about the things
I’m thinking about,” said Lena, “because I’ve had experience with some of the issues that
I’m thinking about.” And Tessa recognized that she was making choices that reflected her
own interests, not external influences, explaining that “whatever I want to do I will do it; if I
don’t want to do it, at the end of the day it’s not going to happen.”
When asked in September to talk about how he felt the gap year impacted his
transition to college, Vinny said that as a result of his year, he had gained the most in terms
of self-confidence and determination. “I think that just comes back to the motivation thing,"
he said, like the emotional strength, like thinking like I can handle anything that this year
throws at me.” And in December, Vinny wrote about the "astronomical amount of work" he
had to do at the end of the semester. His effort was rewarded when he was praised by his
English professor for his final paper, an outcome which he described as "not only one of the
highs of my month, but also of my academic career as a whole." He explained that "I worked
a lot harder these few weeks than I had at any point in high school, and I believe that my gap
year and the maturity that came along with it had a lot to do with it."
Baxter Magolda and King reminded us that “[w]ithout developing the capacity to
understand and learn from one’s experiences, students are at a loss to know how to make
intentional choices about what to believe and how to act” (Baxter Magolda & King, 2012, p.
3). Since they understand themselves more as a result of the meaning making that took place
155
during their gap years, several students were able to recognize a difference in the way that
they approached decisions when they arrived at college. Layla, for example, felt that her gap
year provided the context she needed to consider how she makes choices, and move beyond
superficial reasons. She explained that her encounters “sort of stripped away that layer of
ego a lot, and I think that’s obviously come from my gap year, not from anywhere else.” In
college, Layla sensed that other new students seemed to feel the need to prove themselves to
others, but she did not feel such pressure because “you know, I’ve kind of proven myself in a
very different context.”
During our final interview, Andy said that he had been thinking about his use of time
during his first several months in college, and how that may have been different from what
other first-year students were managing. Because he was maintaining his outside projects,
and developing new apps with a couple of other friends, he often did not feel fully focused on
his schoolwork. He found himself trying to determine what he is truly passionate about
“because I spend time doing things that you know working on projects and stuff and like
answering emails and all these crazy stuff that a lot of people in my class don’t have to deal
with, but I still have to do all the work that they have to do in order to take the same classes.
At the start of the Fall semester Daniel said,
So far I have been pretty much maintaining a similar level of religious observance as
I maintained in Israel, with the exception of that I am not going to, I am not praying
with the minyan three times a day because there isn’t one and things like that. But as
far as, like, I have observance of Kashrut and observance of Shabbat, I’ve definitely
been on the same place as I have been in the past. Maybe a few weeks after maybe I
am a little more lenient about but I am still very much observant and I think that’s
156
something that changes a lot of people that in the freshman year, the API people who
have come from religious backgrounds, so that’s going to be an interesting thing to
see. I want to stay religious because it means a lot to me.
In October, Daniel wrote that “[o]verall, the last month has shown an improvement in my
college experience, but things are not perfect, which at least to some degree is due to the fact
that I took a gap year.”
These students’ stories demonstrate that their transitions were influenced by the
sequence of encounters in their lives, and by the need to reintegrate into the structured
educational setting of a residential college environment, after having experienced multiple
cycles of differentiation and integration during the gap year.
Living in the Real World
There was one more pervasive thread throughout the interviews, written responses
and focus groups: recurring references to the concept of “real life” or the “real world.” What
students mean by these terms may differ, but most of them made a distinction between being
in college and having “real life” experiences; they were acutely aware of their encounters
with the world beyond college. For example, during one of the Google hangout focus
groups, one student participant asked the rest of group what they had been noticing in terms
of differences between themselves and other first-year students. Andy replied that the year at
his technology company “prepared me less for college and prepared me more for working in
the real world. And so, I feel very much when I’m here that I kind of one foot out the door
because there are so many awesome things going on.”
157
Layla indicated during one of our focus groups that “while I definitely got invaluable
things from my gap year. I wouldn’t say that I was like more or less prepared for college. I
might feel like more or less prepared for life in some ways because I feel like I saw a little bit
more of it,” and she continued to reflect that “I felt like I was prepared for life, but college
itself isn’t exactly the same thing.”
Because Julie had spent time both outside and within the US, working and living in
several multigenerational settings, she became a keen observer of the college experience,
which she described as “very much a bubble” that she had seen from the outside. “It’s just
like, I saw a lot of life. And it’s just, like, this is not real life. It’s just so college and so
young.” In October, when asked to reflect on the ways in which she had been thinking about
her gap year during the semester, Julie wrote that she was very excited about all the courses
that were available to her at DU, explaining, “I want to maximize and also enjoy these four
years of studying, because real life really isn’t like this.”
Vinny made a distinction between learning in the classroom and learning to manage
tasks he encountered during his gap year, such as using his time effectively and enduring
some difficult family issues. He said his gap year was “less learning about academic things
and more learning about worldly things.”
Peter also emphasized that he values his gap year for providing him with some greater
perspective. “If I had gone straight to university from high school,” he said, “I would have
been ready for life in an academic sense, but in this gap year I had many, many, many reallife experiences.” Maria’s reflections were consistent with Peter’s: “I feel that my gap year
is helping me have more distance from and closure to high school. Having had the gap year,
158
it feels like a new phase of my life instead of a continuation of the last fourteen years of
education.”
159
CHAPTER SEVEN: DISCUSSION
Introduction
The transition from high school to college is usually viewed as a passage – a single
transition filled with challenge – and certainly much has been written about first-year
students and their adjustment to the college environment (Christie & Dinham, 1991; Evans,
et al., 2010; Pascarella & Terenzini, 2005; Skipper, 2005; Upcraft, Gardner, & Barefoot,
2005). Gap year students face two or more transitions: first, out of high school and into one
or more different gap year experiences, and then from the gap year into college. By the time
they arrive on campus, they have moved in and out of multiple cycles of differentiation and
integration, and have become more adept at making meaning out of their own experiences.
As a result of this departure from the normative trajectory, the transition to college is likely
to be somewhat more complex for gap-year students than what is typically experienced by
traditional first-year students. This study demonstrates that these gap-year students
approached the first year of college from a perspective of sovereign engagement.
Students in this study did not seem to have any illusions about the challenges they
might face, either during the gap year or subsequently. They began their journeys with
personal goals in mind, felt certain that they would go to college the following year, and
expected growth and change precisely because they were taking a needed a break from the
intensity of high school. The stories they shared, and the reflections they offered, provide
important answers to the questions about who gap-year students are, how they make sense of
their experiences of the world around them, and how they relate to others.
160
Gap Year Students: Who Are They?
The findings suggest that when they become college students, gap-year students are
likely to be engaged in a more sovereign way than their peers, making decisions that are
congruent with their internal voices. These participants reported seeking authentic
relationships with others, and engaging in learning for its own sake. More than their firstyear peers, they know who they are and what they believe because of their encounters during
the gap year – intrapersonal, interpersonal, physical, intellectual, cultural, and emotional –
that challenge and stretch their notions of themselves and the world around them. And
finally, they relate to others through an enhanced lens of self-knowing; they seek authenticity
in their relationships with others and have a greater sense of what they want and need from
those relationships.
Some of these students excelled academically during their first year of college; others
did not. In fact, while Clagett (2013, personal communication) and others have sought to
establish a correlation between gap year students and higher GPAs, my research shows that
these conclusions are flawed. Their self-authored approach to college, in the form of
sovereign engagement, means that this group of gap-year students felt empowered to decide
whether the criteria colleges set — in terms of requirements and grading, for example — are
personally meaningful. They were more selective about how and whether to meet these
criteria.
This study demonstrates that it is insufficient and misleading to examine whether
young people become better college students after a gap year. First, student performance
during college has been shown to correlate quite significantly with high school performance
and levels of education in the household (U.S. Department of Education, 2010), two of the
161
key antecedents to the gap year decision. If gap-year students earn better grades than their
peers, it is likely to be because they had such a strong academic foundation prior to their
interim year.
Second, academic performance is related directly to sovereign engagement, the result
of an accelerated process of meaning making during the gap year. As the students
themselves articulated, the central outcomes of the gap year are developmental. A gap year
is about becoming a motivated, self-aware person, gaining greater perspective, taking time
for thoughtful, critical reflection, developing more authentic relationships, and learning to
make decisions that are congruent with more carefully-examined values. These outcomes are
not measurable by GPA, and in some ways may be at odds with the structured college
experience. Perhaps, as several participants suggested, the gap year makes students more
ready for life. But does that mean more ready for college?
Much of the extant gap-year information suggests that students who take a gap year
between high school and college will arrive for their first year ready to learn, refreshed, and
prepared for college. Students’ grades in college undeniably demonstrate a set of skills and
competencies related to excelling in academic environments. For some college students (for
example, those who are planning graduate study) this is extremely important, and
enormously validating. However, as the richly introspective descriptions provided by the
students in this study indicate, the lived experience of a gap-year student creates a shift in
perspective. They engaged in the college experience from a new vantage point that they
would not have possessed without their gap-year encounters. Now seen more as a measure
of their compliance with external expectations, their grades are less of an indication of their
meaningful engagement in a course or understanding of a concept. Not all of them found
162
academic performance to be an essential goal. In fact, the majority of them wanted to delve
into the learning process much more, and were somewhat less motivated by grades than they
had been before. One such student found himself retreating from the structured academic
expectations and eventually chose to leave school in favor of pursuing other interests that had
been ignited by his gap year. Students largely found that their motivation to act or engage
was internal, rather than external, which was consistent with their sovereignty as learners.
At the start of this project, I had anticipated hearing from participants that they felt
"out of step" with traditional students, or that they felt they were in a liminal state, perhaps
not knowing where they belonged socially, or in the context of making progress toward their
degrees. Instead, I heard that they don't mind slowing down slightly, and that they may
indeed have a different sense of time -- and particularly the timeframe that college implies.
They see college as one phase of their lives, a time defined both by freedom and
responsibility. And they are selective about how they use their time, and with whom they
spend it. However, time was not the dominant theme for these students. Rather, the students
talked about recognizing their own agency, and that of others.
It’s What They Do With It
Students’ ability to recognize agency in themselves and others is the result of layers
of experience, interaction, and reflection over time. There was tremendous variability of
gap-year experiences, even within this small sample — and certainly this is true of the larger
pool of gap-year students nationwide. In fact, the constellation of encounters seemed to be
more important than the fact that the students had taken a gap year in and of itself. In other
words, the key issue is not just a year away from school, though that is part of the story.
163
More salient, however, it is what they did with it: the level of challenge, the details of the
experiences, the amount of responsibility each individual had for her or his own basic needs
and decisions, that made the year significant. These encounters led to the cycles of
differentiation and integration that were so pivotal in the students’ development. Might the
students have found opportunities to take on challenges in similar ways had they gone
directly to college after high school? The students in this study do not believe that would
have been true for them. Whether working in an office, or honing a talent, or traveling alone
in a new place, the students found meaning in their lives through their time away from the
normative path.
There are three particular aspects of the students reflections that helped me to
understand that their development would not have been as profound without their gap year
experiences. First, the participants talked about the need to be self-reliant in the face of
challenge or adversity – such as Mark’s decision to leave the music school he had begun
attending, or Vinny’s experience of supporting his father when he became ill – that spurred
their own growth. They felt the choices and challenges that comprised their gap years were
important catalysts that had value in their journey to increased self-authorship. Second,
development was hastened by the experience of managing their lives in an environment away
from their peers and other common support systems. This was evident in their descriptions
of building relationships with people outside of their previous networks, particularly outside
of their same-age peer groups. And third, built into the gap year, either intentionally or
unintentionally (or both) was time. These students had the gift of time to reflect on their
Encounters, think about their growth and development, and to connect with their values. In
other words, their gap year experiences related directly to deliberate and significant meaning
164
making, in ways that the students feel would not have occurred had they continued directly to
college after completing high school.
This shift in meaning making is the direct result of the “developmentally effective
experiences for promoting self-authorship,” that King, et al. (2009) and others have
recommended as intentional learning outcomes for colleges. Unlike their first-year peers
who come directly to college after high school, when gap-year students arrive at college they
have already had multiple opportunities to develop self-authorship.
With this new clarity, gap-year students in this study are able to see the evanescence
and iridescence of college, and for some, the obsolescence. It is evanescent because they
recognize with great clarity that their undergraduate experience represents just a short
timespan, a period of growth and exploration between the gap year and the rest of their lives.
They see college as a time that is important, meaningful, and brief. To these students,
college is also iridescent, because they are able to see all of the alluring variations in color
and light — of learning, of possibility, of potential — that college presents to them, with a
more discerning eye than they feel they might have had if they had gone directly to college
from high school. They are cognizant of the enormous privilege it is to attend college, to
benefit from all of the opportunities it provides, and at the same time have relatively few
responsibilities. And for some, it is obsolescent – because college no longer represents the
only or best path to lifelong fulfillment, and is becoming less relevant to them. They have
developed this level of awareness through a year of encounters that challenge and push them
along developmentally.
165
Limitations
This study has a number of limitations, associated with the participants involved, my
role as a researcher, and the landscape of related research. Most importantly, this study is
deliberately limited in scope, and therefore it is not possible to draw conclusions about
causality. The students’ stories indicate that gap year experiences and meaning making were
strongly associated. However, it is very possible that these particular outcomes were related
to the same characteristics that caused these 12 students to choose this less common path.
Without a control group, it is not possible to say that the changes were caused by the gap
year, or to conclude that such development would not have happened anyway.
Participants
Because I have used a phenomenological approach, the sample size of 12 is
intentionally small. This allowed me to spend time getting to know the participants, and
connecting with them regularly during the course of several months. However, the sample
was constrained by potential participants’ willingness to participate, and at least in part by
their availability to meet with me at the start of the Fall semester, when the study began. In
addition, all of the participants share certain characteristics which impact the results: they
come from educated households, decided on their own to embark on a gap year, and were
attending highly-selective colleges as full-time first-year students during the course of the
study.
Delayed entry to college of low-income students is based on an entirely different set
of factors and constraints (Rowan-Kenyon, 2007). Higher levels of education among parents
have been associated with socioeconomic status and college-going behaviors of adolescents
166
(Horn, Cataldi and Sikora, 2005). The widespread belief that gap-year students emerge
disproportionately from families with higher socioeconomic status has been conjectured and
seems likely, but has not been well-studied. Though some of their answers revealed
information from which some inferences could be drawn, these participants were not asked to
disclose any details of their families’ socioeconomic status, and this study did not attempt to
capture or examine this aspect of the gap-year phenomenon. There also was not a wide
representation of racial or ethnic backgrounds among these participants.
As a group, the student participants appeared to possess significant levels of financial,
social, and/or cultural capital. While some developmental effects of taking time off between
high school and college may occur for students who encounter barriers to direct entrance to
college, such students typically are not designing or selecting the encounters they have
during the time out of school (Rowan-Kenyon, 2007). Instead, those students are often
contending with other demands, such as caring for family members or earning money for the
household, and their educational goals are often impeded by these other expectations. In
addition, the overwhelming family assumption that college is the next step — a very strong
ingredient for gap-year students — may not be there for other students who delay entrance to
college.
What is clear about the essence of experience for this particular group of students is
that they showed evidence of sovereign engagement during their first year of college after
having taken a gap year.
167
My role as a researcher
My dual roles as both a qualitative researcher and a professional in the field of higher
education had the potential to impact the way that participants responded to me, so it was
incumbent upon me to acknowledge and minimize the extent to which my position
influenced the interactions with the students. In addition, to reduce the possibility that this
study might uncover unexpected information, or in some way upset one or more of the
participants, I attempted to create a climate of mutual trust and respect with my participants.
All of the participants were asked to sign Informed Consent Forms, and I made every
effort to help them understand the purpose of my study before, during, and after their
participation. In her critique of the idea of “informed consent,” Malone noted that “[t]he
inductive, emergent nature of qualitative design precludes researchers being able to predict
where the study will take them” (Malone, 2003, p. 800).
Certainly, the level of trust and rapport a researcher can establish with her participants
influences how willing the participants are to share their stories. At the same time, there is a
delicate balance to strike. “Close rapport with respondents opens doors to more informed
research, but it may also create problems, as the researcher may become a spokesperson for
the group studied, losing his or her distance and objectivity, or may ‘go native’ and become a
member of the group and forgo the academic role.” (Fontana & Frey, 1994, p. 367). In my
interactions with the participants, I attempted to maintain an appropriate distance, with both
transparency and genuine interest.
I was concerned at the outset that my involvement with these students as they made
their transitions during the first year would have an impact on how they experienced those
transitions. In fact, a number of students did express appreciation for having the chance to
168
speak with me and process their experiences. It is possible that participation in this study
provided an additional layer of self-reflection that impacted their ability to make meaning as
they were transitioning into their college environments.
Landscape of related research
Because there is so little scholarly research regarding gap-year students, it was
necessary for me to study a small sample in depth. I chose to focus on their adjustment to
college during the first year, and spent time with them over the course of approximately
seven months. While the process of engaging in this series of conversations promoted some
valuable self-reflection, and provided a platform for the students to discuss their transition to
college as they were experiencing it, there was not ample time to delve more deeply into the
nuance of their experiences. There are, in fact, many other directions this study could have
gone in exploring the way that students’ gap-year experiences shape their lives as college
students. As a researcher, I limited my study to the students’ processes of adjustment to
college during those first several critical months. I did not have the luxury of looking back
on the year with them once the first year was complete.
There also was a limit to the amount of information I was able to gather, even with
five interactions with each participant. Initially, I had proposed a third sub-question: “In
what ways do gap-year students develop relationships with their peers, faculty members, and
others in the college or university community, and how do these impact their experience
during the first college semester?” Upon analysis, this question did not seem sufficiently
answered through the data-gathering process, and therefore I did not include this in the
169
discussion of my findings in Chapter Four. Rather than pursuing this as an explicit subquestion, the theme of developing relationships over time became one of the threads of
inquiry. Throughout the study, students were encouraged to talk about their evolving
relationships with parents, teachers, high school friends, gap-year friends, and college
friends.
Given the dearth of relevant research into the gap-year phenomenon, this study
provides only a preliminary glimpse into the complex and multifaceted experiences of gapyear students once they arrive at American colleges and universities. It raises many
questions that might be explored by other researchers who are curious about these students
and their presence on college campuses.
Implications for Further Research
There is a lot more to discover about gap-year students. The remaining and emerging
questions about gap-year students could provide a platform for many future studies. Gapyear students are a heterogenous group and this sample is only a small, particular subgroup,
all of whom were motivated to research and design their own gap years. Additional research
about gap-year students should further explore the interrelationship of individual, family, and
encounters that produces the developmental outcomes suggested by the Gap Year Impact
Model. What they do have in common is that these students create their own narratives.
This study shows that the existing literature on the gap year focuses on the wrong
outcomes, and is overly generalized. As the Gap Year Impact Model indicates, the
significant outcomes of taking a self-designed gap year are developmental, not academic.
When they arrive on college campuses, gap-year students are adept at negotiating new
170
contexts and relationships, they are confident and perceptive, and they approach college
through the lens of sovereign engagement with themselves and the world around them.
It is my hope that higher education researchers will continue to gather information
about gap-year students, and then share the salient results with college and university
professionals and with the public. Specifically, I suggest that researchers focus on several
key areas of interest: the prevalence of gap-year students in the US, a broader understanding
of gap-year students on campus, and comparisons of gap-year students with other groups of
students.
Gap Year Prevalence in the US
First and foremost, to date there has been no comprehensive attempt to find out how
widespread the phenomenon of taking a gap year might be in the United States. Such data
would be invaluable in beginning to understand the gap year’s increasing popularity. The
annual Cooperative Institutional Research Program (CIRP) study, administered for decades
through UCLA’s Higher Education Research Institute (HERI), annually collects information
about entering college students on hundreds of campuses nationwide (Eagan, et al., 2013).
To date, this study has not captured information about time off between high school and
college (although it does ask respondents to indicate the year they graduated high school), so
does not provide any reliable data about the percentage of students who have taken a gap
year. Nor does it allow for a comparison between gap-year students and traditional first-year
students. A few additional questions on this widely-administered survey could provide
valuable information about the prevalence of taking a gap year, and might lead to additional
lines of inquiry.
171
In addition, to begin to grasp the issue of causality on a wider scale, longitudinal
studies with larger samples of students should examine more thoroughly the antecedent
conditions discussed here. Future studies also should attempt to provide comparisons
between students who do and do not choose to take a gap year, and to ascertain the
applicability of the Gap Year Impact Model with different groups of such students.
Broader understanding of gap-year students on campus
Now that some colleges and universities have begun to track the numbers of gap-year
students arriving on their campuses each year, and a number require newly-accepted students
to take time off before beginning their first year, researchers have an opportunity to
collaborate with professionals on campus to learn more about how gap-year students fare
once they are on campus. While this study looked only at the participants’ early adjustment
to college, it is important to recognize that longer-term outcomes are also critical to consider.
In other words, after a gap year, the transition to the first year of college will not likely be
less complicated — in fact, it may be more complicated — but over time, the students may
get more out of their education because of their patterns of sovereign engagement. Perhaps a
longitudinal study of gap-year students would prove interesting, as it could capture their
experiences and reflections at different times during their college years.
Pursuant to this line of inquiry, future studies should examine the ways that different
gap year experiences might impact the students’ adjustment to college. The developmental
outcomes of self-designed gap years, formally structured gap years, and comparable year off
based on income-related delays should be compared and understood. Such studies could
172
further examine factors such as motivation, gap year viability, and other underlying factors
that relate to the ways the students experience the transition to college.
Even as I advocate for additional research, I believe that we should let go of the
notion that gap-year students will earn better grades in college. This study did not attempt to
capture any specific test scores or grades for the participants, as it was not the main focus of
this study, and obscures what seem to be the most significant outcomes of taking a gap year.
However, in the future perhaps a qualitative study could be paired with some corresponding
quantitative data (e.g. SAT, ACT, AP and IB scores, high school grades, first-year college
grades) to see if patterns emerge.
Finally, this dissertation briefly surveyed some of the claims made by gap-year
organizations. It would be useful to conduct a study that thoroughly examines the marketing
materials for packaged gap-year programs, to look at what they promising, and how
promoters suggest the outcomes of their programs can be measured. The Gap Year Impact
Model provides a rubric for analyzing gap-year programs, to identify components that are
likely to promote the kinds of developmental growth experienced by the participants in this
study.
Comparisons of gap-year students with other groups of students
In selecting students for this study, I deliberately excluded students who had been
required by their institution to take a gap year. Their experiences may have been similar to
those who had elected to take a gap year, but these results should not be generalized to
suggest that those who are required to take a gap year are impacted in precisely the same
173
ways as students who elect to do so. It would be interesting to attempt to compare those
experiences, and draw conclusions based on those different student experiences.
Additionally, the institutions in this study from which participants were drawn were
limited to one region of the country, and one level of selectivity. How might such students’
experiences differ in other parts of the country, or at different institutions? A number of
other comparisons might be considered worthy of further research, as gap-year students
become a significant cohort on more college campuses. Such studies might be modeled on
other research that attempts to understand the lives of smaller sub-populations, such as
students with disabilities, or commuter students on a residential campus.
Finally, a researcher who finds value in the present study might create a measure of
“sovereign engagement” that can be assessed and compared across different student
populations. This would help to ascertain the true impact of taking a gap year on the students
who arrive as first-year students on college campuses each year.
Implications for Practice
This study demonstrates that to be truly transformational, a gap year must include a
stimulus or catalyst that provides meaningful challenge and concomitant support. The
transformation is based on a combination of developing self-reliance, with reduced reliance
on existing support structures, and on interactions within a new cultural environment of some
kind. Pre-packaged gap-year experiences may not provide the same opportunities for such
development to occur, because the students are relying on others to guide them to and
through the moments of discovery. While guidance and structure may have tremendous
value, it is unlikely that self-authorship will be enhanced to the same extent. And to what
174
extent will students arrive at college with a heightened sense of ownership of their education?
To demonstrate that such sovereign engagement adds value to the student experience and
enriches the community, there must be encouragement and support for students who choose
to take a gap year — particularly if they are motivated to design their own set of experiences.
I hope that students, parents, and educators will think together, in an intentional way,
about the purpose and reasons for the gap year. Engaging students in substantive discussions
about what they hope to gain, how they will chronicle their experiences, and how they expect
to grow and/or change, is in and of itself a transformative experience. In addition, the
process of establishing criteria (such as finances, distance, communication patterns) can be a
tremendously developmental shared process. The stories of these student participants
suggest that when the gap year is researched and designed, at least in part, by the student him
or herself, the potential for transformation — and therefore sovereign engagement in the
college experience — is increased.
Once gap-year students arrive on college campuses, their stories must be recognized
as significant to them and to the communities they are joining.
Implications for Students
As the cost of a college education in the US continues to rise, choosing to go to
college has become an extraordinary investment for students and their families. Similarly, as
the value of a college education is relentlessly called into question by the media and by
government agencies, students are faced with a complex set of choices about the right next
steps after high school. Perhaps, as a result of these conditions, and as more gap-year
students share their stories, gap years will continue to gain popularity.
175
A gap year is not the right choice for every student, certainly; nor is it viable for every
family. Still, the more high school students from a variety of backgrounds are exposed to the
concept of a gap year, the less unusual a choice to take a gap year will become. Students or
parents may worry that what begins as an intended gap year may lead to a decision to delay
college indefinitely, or decide against college altogether, and these possible outcomes should
be carefully discussed. However, including consideration of a gap year in the process of
determining what comes next after high school may provide students with an important
opportunity to clarify their reasons to pursue their post-secondary goals.
Implications for High School Guidance Counselors, Parents, College Consultants
During high school, students should be introduced to the concept of taking a gap year,
along with options for determining the viability of such a choice, as described in Figure 4b.
Does the cultivation of self-authorship enter into the discussions that guidance counselors
have with students and parents who are preparing for the daunting process of applying to
college? This study suggests that taking a gap year helps young people clarify their goals
and take ownership over their educational experience. Guidance counselors and college
consultants should be including these outcomes in the range of considerations they present to
students and their families.
Because gap years are gradually gaining in popularity, and because they hold some
genuine appeal, new programs have been cropping up recently. Some of these programs are
organized and sponsored by universities, and are designed to introduce students to a
particular aspect of global citizenship or community service (for example, Princeton’s Bridge
Year Program, UNC’s Global Year Fellowship, and the new Tufts 1 + 4 program focused on
176
service). While these programs undoubtedly can be valuable experiences that open students’
eyes and minds, the structure of the programs suggests that some pivotal encounters, which
have the potential to accelerate a student’s journey to self-authorship, are missing from these
experiences. Interestingly, they also require an application and selection process that is quite
similar (or, in fact, connected) to the process of gaining acceptance into college. Less of a
departure, perhaps, than what gap-year students might experience by researching and
developing their own plan for a year of exploration and discovery.
The importance of such “pre-packaged” gap-year experiences may be the fact that
they do not expose students to as much risk or ambiguity. This should not be
underestimated, particularly because they are expensive to run and have the potential for a
great deal of good will — both within the university community and between the institution
and the sites to which the participating students may travel or work. Yet, the developmental
aspects of the gap year that seem connected to the sovereign engagement of first-year
students in this study are less likely to occur within the structure of a gap-year experience
that has been designed for them. While this is not meant to be a commentary on the nature of
organized gap-year programs, nor an attempt to critique or endorse any particular plan for
taking or utilizing a gap year prior to the start of the first year of college, it is worthy of
further consideration. Perhaps a future study, tracking the experiences of the students who
have participated in such organized programs, would shed more light on the value of those
experiences in contrast to ones that students research and design on their own. Those schools
that do invest resources in their own pre-packaged programs must be transparent about their
goals for the programs, and should invest intentionally in support of the developmentallyeffective components that were so meaningful to the students in this study.
177
Implications for Colleges and Universities
Once they arrive on campus, gap-year students must be welcomed and valued by the
community. Students in this study initially hoped that others would be interested in their
stories, and subsequently they resigned themselves to the fact that few of their peers seemed
to care. This research indicates that their stories do matter, and can provide valuable insight
into how these students can contribute to the classroom and the student experience. A
student who has had relevant work experience, for example, could be granted an opportunity
to deviate from a particular course sequence. Someone who has lived abroad might be
tapped as a peer mentor for students thinking about international study. This means that the
communication pipeline on campus should be well-designed: professionals in the Admission
Office should provide information to those in Student Affairs and Academic Affairs, so
incoming first-year students may be identified and tapped for their unique perspective. In
turn, academic advisors and peer mentors should be made aware of gap year students in their
midst, and encouraged to speak with the students about their experiences during the year.
This study also reveals that common measures of student success, such as persistence
or GPA, lack sufficient nuance to understand the gap-year student experience. A tradition of
assessing student success according to these markers “has not provided higher education with
an effective repertoire of interventions to enable more students to reach their educational
goals. Instead, a broader vision of student success is needed.” (Schreiner, et al., 2012, p. 2).
Gap-year students may or may not excel in the ways that have been commonly measured, but
their striking sovereign engagement should be recognized and investigated, as their presence
places new demands on higher education institutions.
178
On some campuses with idiosyncratic missions and cultures, sovereign engagement
of gap-year students may present unique challenges. For example, a religiously-affiliated
university or one with a very rigid undergraduate core curriculum is unlikely to leave room
for students who wish to exercise their sovereign engagement by deviating from the school’s
expectations for behavior or academic progress. Rather than deny accepted students the
chance to defer matriculation in favor of a gap-year experience, such schools must prepare to
welcome them to campus and offer some additional guidance about returning to a highlystructured educational setting.
Gap year students on some campuses are invited to gather during Orientation week or
early in the first semester, as was the case at two of the three institutions included in this
study. Such gatherings provide a chance for the students to meet one another, to share their
stories, and perhaps form some bonds with other gap-year students who may have had
similarly transformative experiences. At schools where students are invited to make
presentations or give talks about their own experiences, gap-year students might be
encouraged to collaborate on a session describing the impact of their gap years.
Administrators in higher education should be tracking these students, and identifying ways to
both support and harness their sovereign engagement in the community.
Finally, gap-year students are likely to become worthy role models for their college
peers, demonstrating a heightened self-authorship that enhances their ability to make
decisions that are consistent with their own values and aspirations. They also are unique in
their ability to cross over other boundaries within the student body, so that attempting to
lump them in with a particular class year, intended major, or other defined group may not
feel relevant to their experience. Instead, the presence of gap-year students on campus offers
179
practitioners the chance to think beyond usual parameters, and to consider ways of
encouraging relationships and partnerships across other categories.
Conclusion
Rather than experiencing the year away from school as a time of idleness or lost
productivity, gap-year students are likely to talk about their time between high school and
college as a year on, rather than a year off — a year of tremendous intensity and personal
development. In my professional life, I often hear gap-year students say that they favor the
term “bridge year,” because the very term “gap year” suggests a void or an absence of
something substantive, and they feel instead that it is pivotally transformative. One gap-year
proponent talks of the gap year as an “intervention” that helps students clarify a sense of
purpose before heading to college (Pendoley, 2014). Existing organizations, such as Global
Citizen Year, Dynamy Internship Year, and the Center for Interim Programs, use specific
language that captures the focus of the activities they promote. Purposeful terminology that
includes the widest range of endeavors might focus on the enrichment, the intentionality, or
the potential enlightenment of a gap year. Other possible terms include “year of intention,”
which Nichole Fazio-Veigel of the University of Tennessee has used to refer to post-college
experiences (Fazio-Veigel, personal communication, March 27, 2015); “enrichment year,”
or, in light of the present research, “year of sovereignty.”
Just as plausibly, a newer term may emerge, capturing the true essence of gap-year
student experience in all its many facets. Or perhaps, if taking time off before college
180
becomes more common in this country, the need for a discrete term to describe it will be
diluted or phased out altogether.
Regardless of the terminology, it is clear that gap-year students bring an important
richness of experience and perspective with them to college campuses. Their participation on
campus in classes and activities reflects the growth and development they have experienced
during the year, some in more positive ways than others. Among the participants in this
study, all demonstrated a pattern of sovereign engagement in the college experience,
allowing them to identify the ways they wanted to be involved as college students. The first
year of college was shaped quite remarkably by the encounters these students had during
their gap year, by the self-authorship that developed as they made meaning out of those
encounters, and by their sovereign engagement when they began school again.
It is evident that young people experience tremendous personal growth during a year
of encounters between high school and college, and that the process of returning to the world
of structured education may instigate meaningful thoughts, relationships, and perspectives on
the purpose of college. The mutual process of education and development between student
and institution provides an opportunity for mindful development and continual integration.
“The highest role of the educator,” wrote Walker Percy, “is the maieutic role of Socrates: to
help the student come to himself not as a consumer of experience but as a sovereign
individual.” (Percy, 1975, page 63). As more gap-year students arrive on college campuses
each year, their sovereign engagement will bring new voices into the conversations about
higher education.
<><><><><><><><><><><><>
181
Appendix A: Initial Invitation to Potential Participants
Note: This email message was sent jointly by the researcher and the Dean of Admissions at
each of the three institutions, to all incoming gap-year students. Interested students were
asked to complete a brief survey, which was used to yield a total of four participants from
each institution.
Dear Student,
Congratulations on starting your first year at [institution]!
We would like to invite you to participate in a research study that looks at how gapyear students experience the first semester of college. This would involve an interaction with
the researcher once per month from September through January, for a total of approximately
5 hours of your time over the course of the study.
Because you have had the unique experience of taking a gap year before arriving at
[institution], we hope you’ll consider taking part in this study. We hope the findings will
help us better understand the needs and perspectives of gap-year students like you. Your
participation in the study is completely voluntary, and if you indicate your interest, you will
receive additional information before the research begins.
If you are interested, please click on the link below to reach a brief, confidential
demographic survey that will help the research team learn a little bit more about you: [link to
Qualtrics survey inserted here]
Many thanks for your time. Have a great semester!
Sincerely,
Dean of Admission and Lori Tenser, Doctoral Student Researcher
182
Appendix B: Qualtrics Survey
Public High school
Private Religiously-Affiliated High School
Private Secular High School (no religious affiliation)
Home-Schooled
Other (please describe)
Urban
Suburban
Rural
Female
Male
Other
Default Question Block
Thank you for your interest in participating in my study about gap-year students. Please answer these brief
demographic questions to share a bit about yourself. Your answers will help me to identify the widest range
of participant characteristics and to keep track of responses at a later point. When you're done please click
the "submit" button.
Feel free to contact me with any concerns or questions you may have.
Take care,
Lori Tenser
ltenser@wellesley.edu
Demographic Questions
What is your date of birth?
Month
Day
Year
What kind of high school did you attend?
Which of the following best describes the area you live in?
What is your gender?
Qualtrics Survey Software https://s.qualtrics.com/ControlPanel/Ajax.php?action=GetSurve...
1 of 2 7/9/13 9:30 PM
183
Please contact support@surveyz.com if you have any questions regarding this survey.
Had a job
Had an internship
Volunteered or did community service
Traveled in the U.S.
Traveled abroad
Studied a language
Took classes
Other (please describe)
What did you do during your Gap year (choose all that apply)
Please use the space below to share any additional information you would like me to know, or to post your
questions.
Qualtrics Survey Software https://s.qualtrics.com/ControlPanel/Ajax.php?action=GetSurve...
2 of 2 7/9/13 9:30 PM
184
Appendix C: Interview Protocols
I. Initial Interview Protocol – September 2013
Intro: Hello, and thanks for spending time with me today. I’d like to start by getting
to know a little bit about you and your background, and then conduct the interview in three
distinct sections. First we’ll talk about the factors that led to your decision to take a gap year
before starting college, then we’ll move briefly to how you spent your gap year, and finally
we’ll spend the bulk of our time together discussing your aspirations for your first year at
[name of college or university], and your experiences so far.
First, let’s talk about some general things about you.
1. Tell me about your background, your family, and where you grew up.
Probes: What was your high school experience like? How would you describe your
neighborhood or community? Talk to me about the influences and experiences that led you
to what you were like before your gap year.
2. Tell me a little bit more about your family.
Probes: Have other people in your family attended college? Growing up, which
members of your family did you depend upon for help and support?
3. Looking back on your high school experience, how would you describe the kind
of person you were then?
Probes: Could you talk about what some of your strengths were? Your weaknesses?
Your interests at the time? With whom did you spend most of your time?
185
Deciding to take a gap year
4. Tell me about how and when you decided to take a gap year? Did you apply to
college and then defer?
Probes: What factors did you consider as you were exploring the option of taking a
gap year? Who and/or what were influential? Were there specific considerations that were
more important than others? Did you encounter a range of reactions? How did your family
react initially to the idea? Your siblings? Your high school guidance counselor? The
College or University?
5. Ultimately, what would you say were your main reasons for your decision to
take a gap year? What, if any, specific goals did you have for the year?
Probes: What were the most compelling reasons for and against taking a gap year?
Were those reasons clear to you when you made your decision, or have they become clearer
to you in retrospect? Whom did you have to convince?
6. What were the biggest concerns you had? The biggest challenges you faced?
Probes: Who were your best allies? What were your best resources? How much
planning was involved? For example, was it difficult to find the financial resources to pursue
your interests for the year? Were you worried about “losing time” in terms of getting your
college degree? Did you have any concerns about what it would be like to start your first
year of college after taking the gap year?
Spending the gap year
7. Now I’d like to hear about how you spent your gap year. Please describe where
and how you spent the year after high school graduation.
186
Probes: Were you in several different places? Do you think of your gap year as
beginning immediately after high school?
8. Can you talk about the activities you were engaged in when you were
[in ____________] or [working for ____________] or [doing ____________]? What
was that experience like for you?
Note: If student had more than one experience, this question and the subsequent
ones in this section may have been treated separately for each experience.
Probes: Were you learning new skills? Using skills you had already developed?
Were these the things you had expected to be doing?
9. Did engaging in these activities help you to achieve the goals you had for your
gap year experience? In what ways?
10. How are you a different person now than you were before you took your gap
year?
Probes: In what ways do you feel you changed or developed during the past year?
How do you know? Is this what you expected to happen? Could you have predicted these
changes?
Coming to College
11. This brings us to your arrival at [name of school]. What has it been like so far?
Probes: How did you feel about getting ready to come to [college or University]
after your gap year experience? Do you feel ready to start as a first-year student? Why or
why not? What are you excited about? What goals do you have? Do you have any concerns
about your preparation for college, or about your transition into this environment?
187
12. What has it been like getting to know other students since you have arrived? Do
you feel a sense of belonging here?
Probes: Are you finding it easy or difficult to make friends? How will you
determine whether you and another student will hit it off? Do you feel you have many things
in common with other new students? Why or why not?
13. Have you been thinking about your gap year experience during these first weeks
at [school]? If so, in what context?
Probes: Do you feel (or expect to feel) the impact of your gap year in your academic
experience, personal interactions, other activities on campus?
14. What concerns and challenges – academic, personal or social – do you have as a
first-year student?
Probes: In what ways did your gap year experience contribute to these challenges, if
at all? In what ways did your gap year experience have an impact on the way you viewed
and/or handled these challenges?
15. In what ways do you think you might grow or change during your first year?
Probes: To what extent are these similar expectations to the ones you had during
your gap year? How will you define what it means to have a successful first year at [school]?
16. To what extent are the things on your mind just like those of traditional first-year
students – those who did not take a gap year? To what extent are the things on your mind
different than those of traditional first-year students? Why?
Closing remarks:
Thank you for taking the time to meet with me. Is there anything else you would like
to add that we did not already discuss?
188
II. Interview Protocol – February
Introduction:
Now that you have completed one semester at [name of institution], and are about to
begin your second semester, I’d like to ask you some questions about how you experienced
your first semester in college.
1. What were the highs and lows of your Fall semester?
Probes: What stands out for you? How did you describe your semester to folks when
you were home during the break?
2. How did you do in your courses?
Probes: Did you enjoy your classes? Did you feel engaged with the material? Do
you feel your grades reflect your understanding of the material and are representative of your
academic potential? Why or why not?
3. Tell me about the relationships you developed during the first semester.
Probes: Did you develop some close friendships? How much time and energy did
you put into your relationships outside of [school]? Who were the people with whom you
developed the best relationships? To what extent did your relationships with family
members change since the start of the fall semester?
4. Did you spend much time thinking about your gap-year experience during your
first semester at [school]? If so, in what context(s)? If not, why not?
Probes: How, if at all, did you feel the impact of your gap year in your academic
experience, personal interactions, other activities on campus?
189
5. To what extent were the things on your mind just like those (or not) of
traditional first-year students – those who did not take a gap year? Why?
6. How have you grown and changed since we spoke in September? How do
you know?
Probes: What effect do you feel your gap year has had on your experience as a firstyear student?
7. Now that you have the luxury of looking back, if you had it to do all over
again, would you do a gap year?
Probes: Why or why not? Would you do it exactly the same way, or would you
change some things?
8. I’ve spent some time reviewing the interviews, focus groups, and written
prompts we did in the Fall, and I would like to share some of the themes I’ve begun
to notice. Would you please react to the following ideas? This will help me to check
my analysis against your experience, which will improve the validity of this study.
[use preliminary analysis of data to generate list of themes and concepts to review
with the participants]
Closing remarks:
Thank you for taking the time to meet with me. Is there anything else you would like
to add that we did not already discuss?
190
Appendix D: Focus Group Protocol
Note: Two focus groups were held via Google HangoutTM, with students from all
three campuses, in November 2013. Both focus groups used the following protocol.
Introduction
Thanks to all of you for joining this discussion today. As you know, no one has
written about what it’s like to be a gap-year student as you transition into the first year of
college, so I hope that your insights will help me to capture and explain your experience.
Let’s start with some introductions.
All of you are currently first-year students, and all of you took a gap year after high
school. Why don’t you introduce yourself to me, and to each other, by name, where you’re
from, what you did during your gap year, and where you are in school now (or what you’re
hoping to study). [Students introduce themselves.]
Thanks, everyone. Our time together today will be guided mostly by what you’d like
to discuss, although I have some initial questions to get us started. I’m interested in knowing
more about your experiences as first-year college students who have taken a gap year, and it
will be helpful for me to hear the things you feel you have in common with one another, if
any. I’m also interested in knowing the ways you are experiencing your lives as students
now.
1. What are the advantages and challenges for you? What factors are making your
experience easier or harder for you to get comfortable as a student on your campus?
191
Probes: Has it been easy to make friends? Have you developed friendships
with other gap-year students? Do you think you fit in with other traditional
students on your campus? Why or why not?
2. In what ways have you felt successful or capable so far this semester?
3. To what extent do you believe the things that are on your mind now are just the same
as those of other first-year students – those who did not take a gap year? To what
extent do you believe the things that are on your mind are different than those of other
first-year students? Why?
Probes: How does your gap-year experience tie into your mindset now?
What effect do you feel taking a gap year is having on you now, in terms of
academics? Your social interactions? Your confidence?
4. In what ways did your gap-year experience shape who you are, as a college student
and as an individual?
Probes: How did you change during your gap year? What do you think were
the factors that led to this change? Do you think you are a different kind of
student now than you would have been had you gone directly from high
school to college?
5. To what extent, if any, have you been drawing on your gap year experience during
your first semester at [school]?
Probes: Do you expect to feel/have you felt the impact of your gap year as
you pursue your academic goals, develop friendships, and become involved in
activities on campus?
6. What has been easiest for you so far? What has been difficult?
192
7. Since you started the semester, which of your relationships have been easiest to
pursue or sustain? Who are the people you feel really understand and support you?
Probes: What are people doing that allows you to feel a sense of belonging
here? To feel valued and known? Do folks on campus explicitly know this
about you?
8. As you discuss your thoughts and feelings, in this group setting, do you find
yourselves expressing similar perspectives? Why or why not?
9. What advice would you have for other new students coming to school after a gap
year? Is there any advice that you wish someone had told you before you got to
school?
10. Is there anything else would you like to share or discuss?
193
Appendix E: Monthly Written Prompts
The following prompt were sent to all participants twice during the Fall semester
(once in October and once in December 2013) as an attachment to an email message:
Please use as much space as you’d like to respond to this question; we welcome your
thoughts, feelings, reflections, and questions. You may also attach an image or graphic
representation as part of your response. Feel free to use your creativity.
What have been the highs and lows for you this past month? These could be related
to your academic work, your relationships, or your overall life as a college student so far.
How (if at all) do you feel your gap year is impacting your college experience?
194
Appendix F: Revised Informed Consent Form
Boston&College Lynch&School&of&Education Consent&Form
Informed&Consent&to&participate&in&
Off the Conveyor Belt and Back on Again:
How Taking a Gap Year Impacts the Experience of First-Year College Students
Researcher:&Lori!I.!Tenser
Type&of&Consent&:&Adult&Consent&Form&
Introduction
• You!are!being!asked!to!participate!in!a!research!study!of!gap9year!students!in their!first!semester!of!college.!!
• You!were!selected!to!be!in!the!study!because!you!took!a!gap!year!before!matriculating!as!a!first9year!student
at![Institution!A,!B!or!C].
• Please!read!this!form.!Ask!any!questions!that!you!may!have!before!you!agree!to!be!in!the!study.!
Purpose&of&Study:
• The!purpose!of!this!study!is!to!get!to!know!a!small!group!of!first9year!students!who!took!a!gap!year!before!
coming!to!college.!!We!are!interested!in!knowing!how!each!of!you!experiences!the!transition!to!college!during!
the!first!semester,!and!how!or!whether!your!gap!year!has!an!impact!on!your!adjustment.
• People!in!this!study!are!from!three!different!selective!colleges!in!the!Northeast.
What&will&happen&in&the&study:
• If!you!agree!to be!in!this!study,!you!will!participate!in!two!909minute!interviews,!one!in!September!2013!and!
one!in!January!2014.!!You!will!also respond!in!writing!to!a!written!prompt!twice during!the!fall!semester!
(October!and!December).!!Finally,!you!will!participate!in!a!focus!group!via!web!interface!with!other!gap9year!
students!in!early!November.!!
Risks&and&Discomforts&of&Being&in&the&Study:
• There!are!no!expected!risks.!!This!study!may!include!risks!that!are!unknown!at!this!time.
Benefits&of&Being&in&the&Study:
• The!benefits!of!being!in!this!study!are!limited.!!We!hope!that you!will!value!the!opportunity!to!talk!about!your!
experience,!and!to!reflect!on!the!impact!of!your!gap!year!on!your!adjustment to!college.!!You!may!also!find!it!
valuable!to!meet!and!speak!with!other!gap9year!students!about!their!experiences.!!You will!be!offered!an!
opportunity!to!review!and!learn!more!about!the!results.
Payments:
• You!will!receive!the!following!payment!in!appreciation!for!participating in!the!study:!A!$10 gift!card!to!
Amazon.com!or!your!college!bookstore!for the!initial!interview; a!$10 gift!card!for!each!of!the!two!written!
prompts;!a!$20!gift!card!for!your!participation!in!the!focus!group;!and!a!$50!gift!card!at!the!conclusion!of!the!
final!interview.!!In!sum,!the!compensation!you!will!receive!totals!$100!in!gift!cards.
Costs:
• There!is!no!cost!to!you!to!be!in!this!research!study.!
Confidentiality:
• The&records&of&this&study&will&be&kept&private.&&During&our&final&interview,&you&(the&participant)&and&I&(the&
researcher)&identified&specific&aspects&of&your&story&that&should&be&modified&and&other&aspects&that&should&
be&reported&accurately,&despite&the&fact&that&these&may&make&it&possible&for&a&reader&to&identify&you.&&As&the&
195
2
2
Rev. 8/15/11 Subject’s Initials___
researcher,&I&agree&to&share&with&you&drafts&of&any&written&portions&which&describe&you&or&specific&aspects&of&
your&experience,&and&to&give&you&the&opportunity&to&request&that&some&information&be&deleted&or&further&
obscured&prior&to&publication&of&my&dissertation.&&
• All!electronic!information!will!be!coded!and!secured!using!a!password9protected!file.! Any!recordings!of!our!
interviews!and!focus!group!will!be!used!only!for!the!purpose!of!this!study.!!They!will!be!transcribed!in!full,!and!
the!original!recordings!will!be!deleted!after!the!conclusion!of!the!study.!!
• Mainly!just!the!researchers!will!have!access!to!information;!however,!please!note!that!in!exceptional!
circumstances!a!few!other!key!people!may!also!have!access.!!These!might!include!government!agencies.!!Also,!
the!Institutional!Review!Board!at!Boston!College!and!internal!Boston!College!auditors!may!review!the!research!
records.!!
Choosing&to&be&in&the&study&and&choosing&to&quit&the&study:
• Choosing!to!be!in!this!study!is!voluntary.!!If!you!choose!not!to!be!in!this!study,!it!will!not!affect!your!current!or!
future!relations!with!your institution,!or!with!Boston!College.
• You!are!free!to!quit!at!any!time,!for!whatever!reason.,!or!to!decline!to!respond!to!any!particular!question.
• There!is no!penalty!or!loss!of!benefits!for!not!taking!part!or!for!quitting.!!
• During!the!research!process,!you!will!be!notified!of!any!new!findings!from!the!research!that!may!make!you!
decide!that!you!want!to!stop!being!in!the!study.
Getting&Dismissed&from&the&study:
• The!researcher!may!dismiss!you!from the!study!at!any!time!for!the!following!reasons:!(1)!it is!in!your!best!
interests!(e.g.!side!effects!or!distress!have!resulted),!or!(2)!you!have!failed!to!comply!with!the!study!rules.
Contacts&and&Questions:
• The!researcher conducting!this!study!is Lori!Tenser.!!For!questions!or!more!information!concerning!this!
research!you!may!contact!her!at!ltenser@wellesley.edu or!781.752.6356.!!The faculty!advisor for!the!study is!
Karen!Arnold,!who may be!reached!at!karen.arnold@bc.edu or!617.552.2649.
• If!you!believe!you!may!have!suffered!a!research!related!injury,!contact!Lori!Tenser for further!instructions.
• If!you!have!any!questions!about!your!rights!as!a!person!in!this!research!study,!you!may!contact: Director,!
Office!for!Research!Protections,!Boston!College!at!(617)!55294778, or irb@bc.edu.
Copy&of&Consent&Form:
• You!will!be!given!a!copy!of!this!form!to!keep!for!your!records!and!future!reference.
Statement&of&Consent:
• I!have!read!(or!have!had!read!to!me)!the!contents!of!this!consent!form.!I!have!been!encouraged!to!ask!
questions.!!I!have!received!answers!to!my!questions.!!I!give!my!consent!to!be!in!this!study.!!I!have!received!(or!
will!receive)!a!copy!of!this form.
Signatures/Dates&
Study!Participant!(Print!Name)!: Date!______
Witness/Auditor!(Signature): Date!______
196
Appendix G: Derivation of Gap Year Impact Model
Gap$Year$Impact$Model Concept:$$Gap$Year$Decision$
(High school achievement, Family expectations about college attendance, viability of the gap year
– including individual
motivation and financial feasibility)
Analysis Cluster Included codes Sample key comments/ phrases
Gap Year Planning,
Preparation and Feasibility
• Advice
• College search process
• Expectations about going to college
• Family influence
• Family support
• Finances
• Gap year decision-making
• Getting away
• Goals for the gap year
• High school academics
• High School background
• High school background
• Parents’ education
• Planning
• Social pressure in high school
• Sports in high school
• Stress in high school
• Timing
“I guess it was largely such an expectation
that it didn’t need to be said. And the
school that I was going to it was assumed
everyone would go to college.”
“My grandparents feel very strongly that I
should go to college, and a college
education is like really important.”
“And especially by the end of my senior
year, I was definitely feeling that I was
heading towards burnout
– I needed to stop,
take a break, reevaluate. “
“So I became really interested in seeing all
the ways I could go as a person and all the
ways I could push myself to become more
interesting or more effective, less, more
like of a fearless, confident, competent
person.”
“So mom and dad paid for the plane tickets,
and the tuition for the [language] academy
the first semester, and I paid for all my
living expenses the second semester.”
197
Gap$Year$Impact Model Concept:$$Encounter
Analysis Cluster Included codes Sample key comments/ phrases
Gap Year Encounters • Challenge leads to growth
• Contact with family
• Freedom
• Goals for the gap year
• Independence
• Internship
• Expectations
• Job/working
• Language
• Nervous/worried
• Real life
• Relationships during the
gap year
• Responsibility
• Sense of time
• Service
• Travel
“I learned a lot about the industry, and I learned a lot about
technology and how startups work, you know, I guess what I set
out to do.”
“While I was in Lima, I felt pretty isolated, because I would go
to work, come home from work, and then it was like, what do I
do?”
“I mean you wouldn’t think about it, but whenever a kid comes
home with a little heart that has like a little message on it there
is someone that makes that.”
“[My year] taught me a lot about waiting before you make
commitments to things and being really judicious about where
you put your time, and realizing that, like, re-charge time is
super important.”
“When you’re traveling on your own … you just have to be
conscious of everything. You know, you gotta have everything
figured out – your tickets, your safety, you’ve gotta know
where you’re going, you’ve gotta be in touch with the right
people, and all this stuff.”
“So I got up real early, I was in a suit the entire day, it was a
very formal environment. Get home at seven in the evening. …
it was a really important insight, like, this is how work life can
look.”
“I think it was a very important year of change in my life both
religiously and growing up and developing a connection to
Israel that I would not have otherwise, being able to live in a
foreign country and being able to being my own person there.”
198
Gap$Year$Impact$Model Concept:$$Meaning$Making
Analysis Cluster Included codes Sample key comments/ phrases
Self-Authorship • Agency
• Changes noticed by others
• Confidence
• Fear of Missing Out
• Goals for the future
• How I changed
• Important to me
• Knowing myself
• Living in the present
• Maturity
• Meaning making
• Privacy
• Relevance
• Self
• Self-efficacy
• Worldview/perspective
“I just need to make a move to become the person I want to be –
my identity is not at the whim of what I feel others have
encouraged or wanted me to be. I think I felt that way through a
lot of high school.”
“And what I learned [during my gap year] was how to be outside
of the system … not buy in to all the cultural norms and cultural
rules of a given society.”
“Taking a gap year requires a certain kind of thinking … because
you need to organize things by yourself, you need to be able to
live by yourself or you need to just be, I think, more mature.”
“My gap year experience has definitely made the college
experience different. It has allowed me to stay more connected
to my religious beliefs and practices in a secular environment.”
“My gap year puts things into perspective. I appreciate so much
that I don’t have to make my own food. I know how it is to only
live with your family for months, and have very little interaction
with people of the same age.”
“I think it’s one of the best lessons of the whole thing was just
like, if you want to do something, it’s up to you to do it. You
can’t wait for someone else to tell you to do it or for it to fall into
your lap. You have to be the one to make an action. “
199
Gap$Year$Impact$Model$Concept:$$Sovereign$Engagement
Analysis Cluster Included codes Sample coded comments/ phrases
Adjusting to College • Academic engagement
• Academic performance
• Contact with family
• Enthusiasm for school
• Extracurricular
engagement
• Fear of Missing Out
• Free time
• Goals for college
• Nervous/worried
• Noticing distinctions
between gappers and nongappers
• Privilege
• Relevance
• Sense of belonging
• Social pressure
• Stress
• Success
• Talking about the gap year
• Thinking about the gap
year
• Timing
• Transition to college
“For me grades are a by-product of the learning, not the other way around.”
“The writing I did at the beginning of this year was not as good as the writing
that I did at the end of my senior year, because … it’s a skill that will get rusty
just like anything else.”
“I feel like I am the best student I could be in college. Like I’ve been doing all
my homework, turning everything in, studying, like getting good grades on
everything I’ve done so far.”
“I just feel like the gap year itself was such a positive experience that it is worth
the rough time that I have had since.”
“I think that the gap year made the transition harder.”
“My gap year helped me to calm down, it wasn’t like the stress of high school
and going right away to college… I can refresh, I can do this.”
“I was still very nervous, but I had a lot less sadness, and a lot less anxiety,
frustration. Like, a lot of my friends, they were very excited to go to the school,
but at the same time they were really saddened by everything they were leaving
behind, you know, high school and their family and their friends. Whereas for
me, I’d already lived this year.”
“People will joke around, like, I am such FOMO right now, I should be doing
XYZ. But why should you be doing it if you don’t really want to?”
“If I create my life as a series of intentional choices then it is not possible that
time just passes by, because everything is intentional.”
“During my gap year, I forgot all the calculus and physics I learned in high
school. So now I’m here taking very basic intro-level classes, that are also
really hard … But it’s also really boring because as soon as I see this thing, I’m
like oh, I remember that, I already learned that two years ago, and so it’s not
interesting.”
“[This perspective] may be both the function of people who choose to take a
gap year and a function of what happens during the gap year that comes with
you when you start school.”
“I truly believe that the gap year has a lot to do with my balancing of both
[athletics] and school work so far, and I believe it will continue to help as the
year goes on and [my team’s] season starts to really be a burden.”
“I think doing my gap year was just very much like proving to myself, like, no
if you want to do something else, do it. It doesn’t matter that you haven’t done
it before you can just go do it, like you don’t have to be prequalified for
everything that you do in life.”
200
Gap$Year$Impact$Concept:$Changing$Relationships
[not explicitly included in graphic but reflected in each phase of the Model]
Analysis Cluster Included codes Sample key comments/ phrases
Changing Relationships • Affinity groups
• Dating/boyfriend/girlfriend
• Developing friendships
• Extended family
• Family contact
• Family relationships
• Maintaining friendships
• Meeting other gap year
students
• Mentors
• Relationships during the gap
year
• Relationships with high school
friends
• Relationships with high school
teachers
• Siblings
• Social pressure
• Support
“I think a gap year helps you know yourself better, which allows
you to have healthier friendships.”
“I have a very good relationship with my parents … my parents
were always there and they were usually very helpful.”
“When you have real friends, and not friends you just think are
cool because they were cool in high school or whatever, when you
have real friends, it’s an incredible, deep experience.”
“The people that I find myself drawn to here are people who …
have a more developed sense of empathy, and I think that comes
with a better understanding of the world, and of what it’s like to be
someone who isn’t you.”
“Honestly, the main high point of this month has been deepening
my relationships with all my friends. I know better who is my true
friend and who is not—and that can be painful when someone you
thought was a close friend or was going to be a close friend turns
out not to be. That’s not a low, just a moment of learning, because
the high is HAVING such true friends.”
“The people I want to be in touch with I am in touch with, it’s not
like I am losing control of the situation or anything.”
201
Appendix H: Institutional names
I decided early on, and agreed with the participants, that I would not use the actual
names of either the students or the colleges who participated in my study.
When I met with each participant and discussed the identifying information that
would be included or modified in my final dissertation, one student mentioned that if she
were choosing pseudonyms, she would be inspired by the characters in “Pride and
Prejudice.” When I returned to this aspect of drafting the written study, I came back to this
idea. My decision was to choose a name from each of three great works of fiction, all of
which deal in some way with a coming of age story: Pride and Prejudice by Jane Austen ,
The Age of Innocence by Edith Wharton, and Great Expectations by Charles Dickens. The
references, however, are not otherwise more symbolic than that. For one thing, neither the
characters themselves nor the plot of the novels have any direct relevance to this study.
Next, several appealing literary names are already connected with existing colleges or
universities, in the US or abroad, so these were eliminated. Still, much like the participants
who enjoyed coming up with their own pseudonyms, I enjoyed the process of determining
the new names for the institutions. Eventually, I settled on the following names:
• Archer Polytechnical Institute (API) – a technological research university in the
northeast
• Darcy University (DU) – Ivy-League university in the northeast
• Satis College (SC) -- small liberal arts college in the northeast
202
Throughout my discussion of the findings in Chapter 4, I refer to the schools with
these names, or – more frequently – their abbreviations (API, DU, SC). In addition, I have
altered direct quotes to include these names, rather than the actual names of the institutions.
203
Appendix I: Reflections on Walker Percy’s The Loss of the Creature (1975)
During the process of searching for journal articles and reading through published
dissertations, I came across an obscure reference to Walker Percy’s essay “The Loss of the
Creature” and found it worthy of exploration. I read the essay over and over again until I
understood what Percy was trying to convey. It turned out to be a pivotal moment in my
research.
Percy was a Southern American physician-turned-writer. “The Loss of the Creature”
is an essay included in Percy’s 1975 book, The Message in the Bottle: How Queer Man Is,
How Queer Language Is, and What One Has to Do With the Other. This essay is also
featured in a compilation of essays, “Ways of Reading,” (Bartholomae & Petrosky, 2011)
that is used to teach close reading strategies to undergraduate and graduate students.
In this essay, Percy explores his concept of sovereignty of the knower through a
series of examples of missed opportunities for true engagement with a thing or being or
experience to be known. He describes a troubling loss of sovereignty, in which a person (or
a student) surrenders a level of authentic knowing to an outside expert who crafts or provides
the context for what s/he knows. For example, in describing the fact that learning about a
Shakespeare sonnet in English class is tainted by the teacher, the classroom, the way the
book smells and the way its pages feel, Percy states: “It is only the hardiest and cleverest of
students who can salvage the sonnet from this many-tissued package. It is only the rarest
student who knows that the sonnet must be salvaged from the package.” (Percy, 1975, p. 57).
Catalogs, websites, other students, extended family, and other external forces all play
a role in the traditional student’s impression about what college will be like. It might be said
204
that many students who stay on the conveyor belt are relinquishing control of their education
and their process as learners. In contrast, the gap-year student is more likely to be aware of
all that, and to see the college experience as it presently exists for them, salvaging it from its
many-tissued package. As Percy writes:
However it may come about, we notice two traits of the second situation:
(1) an openness of the thing before one - instead of being an exercise to be
learned according to an approved mode, it is a garden of delights which
beckons to one; (2) a sovereignty of the knower - instead of being a
consumer of a prepared experience, I am a sovereign wayfarer, a wanderer
in the neighborhood of being who stumbles into the garden. (Percy, 1975,
p. 60).
I was inspired to use Percy’s concept of sovereignty to describe gap-year students’
experiences during the first year of college because these students are awakened by the gap
year, often in profound ways. They recognize more about themselves and about their own
agency in their educational experience. They decide where to put their energy, and what
outcomes are acceptable to them, and they begin to hold their own perspective in higher
regard than the views of others. No longer consumers of a prepared experience, gap-year
students are able arrive at college prepared to engage in a sovereign way with things to be
known.
205
Appendix J: Participant Profiles
Participant Profile: Andy
Andy is a male student from urban Pennsylvania. He attended a private high school
and both of his parents have college degrees.It was not part of Andy’s original plan to take a
gap year. In fact, he was very excited about the opportunities to further his computer science
knowledge at API and was thrilled when he was accepted. During the summer after his
senior year of high school, he worked for a small hi-tech firm in Silicon Valley. Once there,
Andy’s work was highly valued by the management team. He was asked to stay on for the
year, and was offered him a large sum of money to do so.
Initially, Andy’s family was not thrilled with the idea, as they were concerned that he
might not end up attending college once he became swept up in the hi-tech world. His
grandparents, with whom Andy has had a very close relationship, were quite upset, as they
had offered to fund his education at API.
During his gap year, Andy lived with family friends in California and developed very
close relationships with the parents and children in the family. He worked in an office
environment with driven, young adult coworkers who shared his passion for computers and
coding. Because he spent most of his time at work, and was living with a family, Andy was
well-fed and did not have major responsibilities for preparing his own meals or paying rent.
When he arrived at API, Andy was consumed with developing and marketing his own
entrepreneurial product, which he had been working on during his gap year. Because he had
been away from academics for a year, Andy did not perform well on a number of required
entrance examinations, so he placed into courses that he found uninteresting. Consequently,
206
he had difficulty seeing the relevance of his coursework, and in fact attended classes only
sporadically. He did, however, enjoy meeting new people and making friends with students
on his hall and through other computer-focused activities.
Andy’s academic performance during the fall semester was poor, barely passing three
of his four courses. In the spring, despite his fall record, he managed to convince his
academic advisor that he should take 5 courses (an overload at API) because there were some
that he actually was very eager to take.
After his first year, Andy took a leave of absence from API, so that he could pursue a
fellowship opportunity to focus on his own technology enterprise.
Participant Profile: Daniel
Daniel grew up in suburban Massachusetts, in a household which included two
parents with advanced degrees, and where there was a very strong emphasis on education.
Although he does not describe his family as particularly religious, both Daniel and his twin
brother decided to attend a Jewish high school in Massachusetts, rather than the local public
school. There, Daniel began to deepen his spiritual side, and he was exposed to the fact that
many graduates of the school spend a year or two in Israel, often studying at a yeshiva, prior
to attending college. A yeshiva is a school focused on the study of religious texts, and the
one that Daniel chose to attend, like many, is only open to men.
Daniel chose to pursue a year at the yeshiva because he wanted to focus on his own
religious transformation. His twin brother did not choose to take a gap year, going directly to
an Ivy League college.
207
When he started school at API after his gap year, Daniel felt unsure about a number
of things. He was apprehensive about his ability to keep up with the rigorous academic
courses, especially given his year away from typical academic work. And — in a more
visceral way — he was concerned about being able to maintain his observant Jewish lifestyle
and traditions within the context of a secular, scientifically-focused, institution. Most of the
personal connections he made during his first semester were with other Jewish students,
whom he met in his kosher living area, or through the Jewish fraternity that he pledged.
After his first semester, Daniel began to feel more comfortable pursuing relationships with
students who were not Jewish.
The transition to college was difficult for Daniel, and he found himself questioning
whether API was the right place for him. At times he felt he should have attended another
school with a higher proportion of Jewish students, but felt that it was unacceptable to choose
that school over API despite the fact that he thought he’d be happier there, because its
reputation was not as impressive. His brother, a sophomore at an Ivy League school in
another state, was really enjoying that experience.
Participant Profile: Jackie
Jackie grew up in a rural but affluent part of New Jersey, and attended an elite,
private high school in a neighboring state. She has 3 siblings, and both of her parents have
graduate degrees.
The idea of taking a gap year presented itself to Jackie when she and her family were
on vacation in Europe, and they began to chat casually about how exciting it would be to
208
spend a year abroad studying and creating art. With the help of a gap year consultant, Jackie
decided to research her options.
Jackie worked with the consultant to identify programs that would allow her to pursue
the things that she wanted to explore: travel, art, slow food, farming, sailing. While she
planned the European portion of her trip quite carefully, it was during the gap year that the
domestic components came into focus. She also was able to contact the consultant while she
was overseas, so she found and booked those other adventures just months or even weeks
before she began them. Jackie was fortunate that her family was able to fully fund all the
components of her gap year.
During her year, Jackie lived in a number of different environments, few of which
included other students in her age bracket. In Italy, there were a number of college-age
students in her program. In Ireland, however, Jackie lived and worked at cooking school
with its own sustainable farm, where there were few people and the others were adults. And
while she was wwoofing(a) and sailing, she was among groups of people of varying ages —
typically she was the youngest.
When she arrived at DU, Jackie was excited about starting classes and becoming
immersed in an academic environment again, with a bit more structure and purpose than she
had during her gap year. She felt that having taken a gap year was more self-indulgent than
impressive, so was uncomfortable when other students were impressed by her gap year
experiences. And she was very excited about the chance to form lasting relationships with
peers, an aspect which had been missing from her gap year.
209
At the end of her first semester, Jackie’s mother became ill, and her life and
perspective changed dramatically. The family’s energy and attention shifted to her mother’s
health and well-being, and drew them all closer together.
Participant Profile: Julie
Julie grew up in an urban neighborhood in northern California. She attended a large
public high school, where was very involved with music, taking private lessons and
performing with several school ensembles. During much of high school, she felt socially
awkward and had difficulty making friends, often preferring to immerse herself in her studies
and other activities.
After a travel book on the family coffee table had inspired Julie to travel to Turkey,
she spent time and energy during her high school years researching ways to accomplish that.
She was specifically fascinated by the fact that Turkey is a stable, democratic state that is
also predominantly Muslim. Eventually she discovered that the US State Department would
fund trips to certain parts of the world, so she diligently pursued and secured the funding for
her dream trip to Turkey. Acceptance into this program meant that Julie would live in a
home with a Turkish family and attend a local high school.
Because she did not know Turkish when she arrived there, and since the program
limits contact with family or friends at home, the experience was completely immersive in a
number of ways. Living in a patriarchal, religious country with very clear moral and societal
rules forced Julie to confront and consider her own values and religious beliefs. She was
encouraged to remember, “It’s not good. It’s not bad. It’s just different.”
210
Before leaving for Turkey, and after she returned home, Jackie worked in a handful of
minimum-wage jobs, to gain work experience and to earn money. Her perspective on
relationships and education were shaped considerably by her interactions with fellow
employees, and also by the people she met in Turkey.
Julie experienced significant culture shock upon her return to the US, and her
subsequent arrival at DU. She aspires to be a sociologist or anthropologist, and her
orientation to the world around her is inquisitive and observant. During the first semester,
she was keenly aware of her reaction to the “hook-up culture” and the gendered dynamics
between male and female students. While her academic performance in her Fall courses was
excellent, and she enjoyed the learning process tremendously, a medical issue prevented her
from returning to DU for the spring semester.
Participant Profile: Maria
Maria attended a public high school in her rural West Virginia community. The
school had a terrific partnership with a local university, so that talented students who maxed
out on the high school curriculum were given the opportunity to take college-level courses,
and Maria took full advantage of this option. She was a high-achieving student who also was
very involved in extracurriculars like marching band and the volleyball team, so her schedule
was quite demanding.
When Maria was in high school, her family hosted an exchange student from Europe,
and she became intrigued with the idea of taking a gap year herself. She could see the value
of taking a break from her rigorous academic trajectory to pursue some other interests and
improve her Spanish fluency before going to college. Her family was supportive, but her
211
parents expected her to fund a good portion of her travel expenses. As a result, Maria
secured two minimum-wage jobs for the first three months, working retail to earn the money
she would need to travel to South America.
Maria spent the first half of her time abroad in one South American city, studying
immersive Spanish at a language institute, and living with a host family. For the second half
of her gap year, Maria moved to a different city to pursue an internship with a local nonprofit organization. Maria sometimes felt very isolated while she was there, and began to
make an effort to develop relationships with people she had met, some of which became very
important to her.
Taking the gap year meant that Maria’s foundation in some basic subjects had eroded
by the time she arrived at API. Therefore, she needed to take some more foundational
courses before moving into more complex courses. The classes were difficult, and at times
she doubted her ability to stick with it, but overall Maria really enjoyed her first semester,
academically and socially. She felt the gap year made her bolder, more outgoing, and more
confident when she started her first year.
Participant Profile: Mark
Mark is a student from suburban New York. He attended a public high school with
an innovative curriculum, and both of his parents have college degrees. He has two older
siblings who also attended Satis College, and both had done gap years before they started
school. So when Mark was accepted to Satis, his mom asked him if he wanted to do a gap
year. He decided that he did.
212
The year had a few distinct segments. First, Mark went to the pacific northwest with
the National Outdoor Leadership School (NOLS) for three months of sleeping outdoors and
doing a sequence of four very rugged outdoor activities. He traveled with a group of 9 young
people, and during the trip they were not able to use any electronic devices. Although he
didn’t feel enormously deprived of that contact while he was away, it did make the few times
he was able to call home very special.
For the second part of his gap year, Mark had planned to attend a small music school
in a different state, but after being there a short time he felt it was the wrong experience for
him. He decided instead, to shorten his stay at the school, and return to New York area,
where he could have access to excellent music education classes. He lived with his mom and
commuted several days a week into the city. It was a much better experience for him.
When Mark returned to his hometown and resumed his former job working with kids,
some people from his workplace commented to his mom that he seemed more confident and
well-rounded, and even that he was better at his job.
At SC, Mark at first felt apprehensive about his ability to make friends, keep u with
the academics, and find time for himself. The recurring theme for Mark was freedom to
make his own decisions, something that he kept coming back to and seems to value highly.
Participant Profile: Layla
Layla grew up in New York City, where she attended a private, all-girls’ high school.
When she attended a panel of recent graduates during her junior year of high school, one
student on the panel had talked very enthusiastically about her experience during a gap year.
At that point, Layla realized this was something she wanted to do. Her family was
213
supportive of the idea, but wanted Layla to take the lead on coming up with a good plan for
her time. She felt fortunate that her family was able and willing to finance the year.
During the first part of her gap year, Layla was working for a non-profit arm of a
small corporation, and living at home with her family. She learned what it felt like to have a
work routine, including a daily city commute. After the internship, she then lived and
volunteered in three different cities in India. Part of her goal for going to India was to have
a service-volunteer experience, to feel like she was giving back to people. Upon reflection,
she had some interesting thoughts and reflections about what she had wanted out of her
experience in India and what she actually got out of it — and how that changed her
perspective on many things.
Participant Profile: Lena
Lena grew up in suburban Pennsylvania. Her mom died when Lena was 15, and this
left her with a lasting sense of grief and longing. During middle school and high school,
Lena was involved with a number of organizations that introduced her to issues of social
justice, which, along with theater, became her passion. While she did not have much helpful
input from her school guidance counselor or her dad, her decision to take a gap year was
supported by a trusted advisor whom she had met through some of her lobbying and social
justice activities.
During her gap year, Lena chose to work with City Year in hopes that she would
make a difference in the lives of young people, and learn more about herself in the process.
She was not expecting the placement into a troubled inner-city Baltimore middle school. The
work, she found, was grueling in its intensity, leaving her feeling exhausted at the end of
214
each day. In addition, she lived in an apartment and needed to prepare her own meals and
manage her own bills. She had very little free time for socializing or cultural activities.
Through her City Year experiences, Lena learned a great deal about the educational system,
about the dynamics of working in a team, and about her own limits and abilities.
When she arrived at DU, Lena felt very confident, and less intimidated than other
students seemed to be about the level of academic challenge. In contrast to her gap year, she
could not imagine that college would feel difficult at all. However, during the course of her
first year, Lena found herself struggling to find her niche. She missed some of the autonomy
she had during her gap year, and was initially overwhelmed with the difficulty of the
academics at DU. She began to recognize and analyze the tension she felt between trusting
her internal voice and integrating into the campus culture.
Participant Profile: Peter
Peter grew up in Eastern Europe, and attended a United World College school in
Canada prior to his gap year, so he had lived away from home before deciding to take a gap
year. His gap year was sort of unconventional in part because it wasn’t carefully scripted.
In selecting specific experiences for the year, Peter used his UWC connections and his own
intuition to set up the year the way he thought would work best.
Because he had been away from home for the previous two years, one of Peter’s
primary goals was to go home and spend time with his family. He has a much younger
sibling with whom he was eager to spend time, and wanted to live at home for a time before
going to college. Therefore, after spending the summer working to promote the UWC
organization in Mexico, Peter headed home to Europe, where he lived with his family and
215
worked for a government agency for several months. The last portion of his year, Peter
traveled to South America to pursue another, very different internship and hone his Spanish
skills.
Peter arrived at DU eager to take challenging classes, and also to develop a social
network. His exposure to several Latin American countries and fluency in Spanish
influenced the courses he chose and the campus events he attended. However, both because
he was an international student and because of his gap year, Peter found that it took him
longer than other students to become acclimated to the campus culture. He also put an effort
into finding friends that he felt shared his interests and values. Peter recognized that the
people he met at DU could become lifelong friends and also potentially influential
connections in business or politics.
During the first semester, Peter earned good grades despite what he felt was
insufficient effort in several classes, including barely skimming much of the reading. He
chalked his performance up to his genuine interest in the material, and in his confidence with
regard to speaking in class.
Participant Profile: Paulina
Paulina is an international student from Latin America, who took her gap year for
several reasons. First, she learned too late in her high school career that American colleges
require students to take standardized admission tests. Second, she wanted to get some work
experience in a few different settings, so that when she got to college she would have a
stronger sense of direction. And finally, Paulina is the one student in the pool who had not
applied and then deferred her acceptance to college; rather, she spent some of her time during
216
the gap-year completing her college applications.
Paulina decided to spend part of her gap year attending an academy where she could
hone her English and Math skills before taking the SATs. She won a scholarship that
supported her tuition, and lived nearby with her grandparents so did not have many living
expenses. Prior to attending the academy, Paulina did an internship in a doctor’s office,
learning first-hand about medical treatment; after the academy, she did an internship with the
Latin American office of a large American manufacturer to learn how businesses function.
Throughout the year, she volunteered with a few different organizations - accompanying
physicians to provide medical care in isolated communities, and building a new library in a
local town where most children did not have access to books.
Paulina found both teachers and peers to be critical of her decision to take a gap year,
telling her she would be wasting a year of her life, and that the schools at home were good
enough. Her parents, however, were extremely supportive an encouraging.
Paulina’s transition to the environment at SC was impacted both by her gap year and
by her status as an international student living in the US for the first time. She arrived at SC
excited to begin her college career but also nervous. She felt her command of English, her
second language, was not as strong as it should have been, and she missed her family, with
whom she is extremely close. She spoke with them every day throughout the year.
In hopes of gaining acceptance into medical school, Paulina began her college career
with high expectations for her academic performance. First semester, she took a slate of
demanding courses, three of which were in math and science. With a boyfriend at another
school, and a sense of purpose, Paulina chose not to invest much time in becoming involved
with extracurricular activities. She lived on an all-female, substance-free floor, which she
217
appreciated, and began to develop some important friendships. In addition to her academic
efforts, she spent much of the first year learning more about American culture.
Participant Profile: Tessa
Tessa grew up near New York City. Her mom and stepdad decided to move the family
into the city to make it more convenient for Tessa and her siblings to attend the Jewish day
schools they wanted. This decision reflected her family’s strong belief in education, and in
living according to Jewish values.
Tessa’s high school encouraged students to spend a gap year in Israel prior to going to
college, and she knew many classmates who chose to study at a seminary for the year.
However, while she felt drawn to Israel for personal and religious reasons, it did not appeal
to Tessa to spend a year focused on the study of biblical texts. Instead, she chose to spend
her year working with an Israeli national service program, volunteering with children in a
school and a community center near Tel Aviv. The children in the community included a
large group of immigrants to Israel from Ethiopia, who were learning to adjust to their new
country.
In Israel, Tessa was given a room in an apartment with 14 other young women, all
Israelis, sharing six bedrooms and one kitchen. Because they lived locally, most of the others
went home on the weekends, and Tessa needed to decide how to spend her free time. She
learned to navigate public transportation, learned to cook without an oven, and dramatically
improved her fluency in Hebrew. She also made a checklist of important sites to see in
Israel, and convinced her apartment-mates to join her in some weekend adventures.
218
When she arrived at API, Tessa felt ready to be a student again. While she was
concerned about the rigor of her courses, she was confident both in her high school
preparation and in her ability to balance the workload with her other interests. She lived in a
suite with other students who keep Kosher, but also branched out and developed friendships
with students she met through her classes and other activities.
Tessa’s first semester grades were very strong, and she felt proud of her performance.
However, she expressed very clearly that the grades were a by-product of her desire to learn
the material in her courses. She found it frustrating that other students seemed more
motivated by grades than by the joy of learning.
Participant Profile: Vinny
Vinny grew up in suburban Arizona, where he was slightly younger than many of the
high school classmates in his grade. A competitive athlete, he found it personally fulfilling
to be part of a team and push himself physically. Vinny’s parents are divorced and he lives
in Arizona with his dad, while his mom lives in another state. He attended a public high
school with a reputation for excellence, and enjoyed his courses there.
In high school, Vinny was a strong student but lacked some social confidence. He
thought about taking a gap year when his athletic coaches suggested he would be an even
more formidable athlete if he spent a year in intensive training after high school. This idea,
combined with his interest in working in a medical research lab, began to provide the
structure of his gap year. He lived at home with his dad and had very few expenses during
219
the year, but did find time to pursue some other scholarship sources to supplement his
financial aid package from SC.
During the course of the year, as Vinny was improving his physical strength and
learning about lab procedures, several personal challenges, including his father becoming
very ill, took center stage. Vinny felt a strong sense of responsibility to work through his
own feelings, support his family members, and still maintain his commitment to his primary
activities.
When he arrived at Satis College, Vinny felt he could handle just about anything. He
was very excited about his courses, and about joining the athletic team there. His year off
had helped him grow stronger and improve his physical performance, so he felt like a good
contributor to the team. He had also learned a lot about the impact of diet and nutrition on
physical health and agility, so stayed focused on that as he made the transition to eating in the
college dining halls. In addition, he found his courses to be engaging and interesting, and
really enjoyed the social scene. Being among a group of peers was a refreshing change from
his gap year, so he made an effort to meet as many people as he could.
Vinny’s grades were strong at the end of the first semester, and he got some positive
feedback from his English professor, which gave him a tremendous amount of satisfaction.
He also expressed pride in his athletic performance, along with his ability to keep his
academics, social life, and physical well-being in good balance. He credited his gap year for
helping to enhance his maturity and sense of responsibility.
220
REFERENCES
Abidi, Z. (2004). Taking a gap year? London: YMCA George Williams College for the Rank
Foundation.
Alexander, K., Bozick, R., & Entwisle, D. (2008). Warming up, cooling out, or holding
steady? Persistence and change in educational expectations after high school.
Sociology of Education, 81(4), 371–396.
Arnett, J. J. (1998). Learning to stand alone: The contemporary American transition to
adulthood in cultural and historical context. Human Development, 41(5-6), 295–315.
Arnett, J. J. (2000). Emerging adulthood: A theory of development from the late teens
through the twenties. American Psychologist, 55(5), 469–480.
Arnett, J. J. (2003). Conceptions of the transition to adulthood among emerging adults in
American ethnic groups. New Directions for Child and Adolescent Development, 100,
63–75.
Arnett, J. J. (2004). Emerging adulthood: The winding road from the late teens through the
twenties. New York: Oxford University Press.
Arnett, J. J, & Tanner, J. L. (2006). Emerging adults in America coming of age in the 21st
century (1st ed.). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Arnett, J. J. (2007). Suffering, selfish, slackers? Myths and reality about emerging adults.
Journal of Youth and Adolescence, 36(1), 23–29.
Arnett, J. J. (2011). Debating emerging adulthood : stage or process? New York: Oxford
University Press.
Baxter Magolda, M. B. (1999). Creating contexts for learning and self-authorship:
Constructive-developmental pedagogy. Nashville, TN: Vanderbilt University Press.
221
Baxter Magolda, M. B. (2004). Making their own way: Narratives for transforming higher
education to promote self-development. Sterling, VA: Stylus Publishing.
Baxter Magolda, M. B. (2008). Three elements of self-authorship. Journal of College
Student Development, 49 (4), 269-284.
Baxter Magolda, M. B. (2009). The activity of meaning making: A holistic perspective on
college student development. Journal of College Student Development, 50(6), 621-
639.
Baxter Magolda, M. B. And King, P. M. (2012). Assessing meaning making and selfauthorship: Theory, research, and application. In K. Ward and L. E. Wolf-Wendle
(Series Eds.), ASHE Higher Education Report, 38 (3). Wiley Periodicals.
Birch, E. R., & Miller, P. W. (2007). The characteristics of “gap-year” students and their
tertiary academic outcomes. Economic Record, 83(262), 329–344.
doi:10.1111/j.1475-4932.2007.00418.x
Bogdan, R. C., & Biklin, S. K. (2007). Qualitative research for education: An introduction
to theories and methods (5th Ed.). Boston: Pearson Education.
Bourdieu, P. (1986). Forms of capital. In J. Richardson (Ed.), Handbook of Theory and
Research for the Sociology of Education (pp. 241–257). Greenwood Press.
Bourdieu, P., & Passeron, J. C. (1990). Reproduction in education, society, and culture.
London: Sage Publications (in association with Theory, Culture & Society, Dept. of
Administrative and Social Studies, Teesside Polytechnic).
Bowman, N. A. (2010). The development of psychological well-being among first-year
college students. Journal of College Student Development, 41(2), 180–200.
