 Silva 1
Nova School of Business and Economics
The Impact of Gap Years on Personal & Career Related Growth
By: Daniel Silva
Advisor: Professor Milton de Sousa
Work Project Submission Date: 4/1/2021
Keywords: Gap Years, Qualitative Research, Career Growth, Personal Growth
This work used infrastructure and resources funded by Fundação para a Ciência e a Tecnologia
(UID/ECO/00124/2013, UID/ECO/00124/2019 and Social Sciences DataLab, Project 22209), POR Lisboa
(LISBOA-01-0145-FEDER-007722 and Social Sciences DataLab, Project 22209) and POR Norte (Social
Sciences DataLab, Project 22209).
 Silva 2
Table of Contents
Abstract ............................................................................................................................................... page 3
Introduction......................................................................................................................................... page 4
Literature Review......................................................................................................................... pages 5-11
The Importance of the Economy of Experience ..................................................................... page 5
The Importance of Having a Well-Structured Gap Year .................................................... pages 5-6
 Reasons Associated with Taking a Gap Year ..................................................................... pages 6-7
 Soft Skills Growth Potential Through Gap Years…………………………………………………………………page 8
 The Value Associated with Attaining Personal Growth………………………………………………………page 8
 Measuring the Intrinsic Value of a Gap Year for the Individual………………………………………….page 9
 The Value Associated with International Gap Year Experiences………………………………………page 10
 The Value of Gap Years in Academia……………………………………………………………………………….page 10
 Future Implementation of Gap Years…………………………………………………………………………pages 10-11
Methodology…………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………pages 12-13
Findings from the Qualitive Case Study Analysis………………………………………………………………….pages 14-21
Qualitive Case Study Analysis Structure…………………………………………………………………………page 14
Findings for Gap Year Participants……………………………………………………………………………pages 15-18
Findings for HR Department Managers……………………………………………………………………pages 19-21
Discussion on Research of Gap Years………………………………………………………………………………….pages 22-26
Discussion and Analysis of Findings …………………………………………………………………………pages 22-23
Further Analysis through Data Models………………………………………………………………………….page 24
Reflection on Prior Theory………………………………………………………………………………………pages 25-26
Limitations and Plans for Future Research…………………………………………………………………..page 26
Conclusion…………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………page 27
Appendix A: Models and Tables………………………………………………………………………………………….pages 28-34
Appendix B: Narrative Stories…………………………………………………………………………………………….pages 35-44
Resources……………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………pages 45-46
 Silva 3
Abstract
For this Work Project, I have decided to focus on how an individual changes their
perception on the impact and value of their gap year. In order to analyze this topic further, I have
decided to interview individuals who have taken gap years, to extract information regarding what
made them change their perception on the matter. In order to capture this information, I utilized
both a narrative approach (to better understand the individual’s journey, along with their
changing mindset) and a case study approach (to better understand the phenomenon of gap years,
while further elaborating what could explain this change in mindset). This was ultimately
accomplished through a series of in-depth interviews with college students and Human Resource
department managers, in order to gain a better understanding of gap years and its impact.
In this Work Project, we defined a gap year as “typically a 1-year academic break where
a student reassesses their overall career goals and objectives.” The individual can still be
engaged in a separate job/activity, as long as, it deviates from their formal education and planned
career path. These factors served as the scope or parameters that was utilized in order to obtain
information. I decided to focus on two different groups: college students who have taken a gap
year who have views that evolved over time due to their work/activity related experiences, and
HR departments to better understand this phenomenon and how it can impact future employment
prospects for that individual over time. (All descriptive/narrative accounts of each individual’s
story can be found in Appendix B section of this paper.) What I ultimately found was that gap
years had a profound positive impact on an individual’s personal and career-related growth.
.
 Silva 4
Introduction
The phenomenon of gap years originated from waves of hippies in the 1960’s, where
young people travelled abroad and conducted various types of volunteer services and temporary
work. (Guomei & Wei, 2017) Nowadays, it has evolved into a growing trend where individuals
seek out both personal and career-oriented growth. When it comes to who actually decides to
take a “gap year” studies suggest that women were more likely to do so compared to men.
(Martin, 2010) This can be explained by their tendency to be a bit more driven towards personal
experiences. Additionally, it was found that English speaking individuals were far more likely
than non-English speakers to decide to take a gap year abroad. (Martin, 2010)
It is also important to understand that the thought process behind taking a “gap year”
truly differs depending on the stage of life the individual is in. When it comes to younger
individuals who seek further education, they are in a more pivotal point in their lives, and will
typically take a year off because of post-school uncertainty, and use it as a means of personal
growth and self-reflection. When it comes to already established university students, they will
typically take a “gap year” based off of more motivating factors in order to learn or work in a
specific field. (Martin, 2010). (A model representing this idea can be found in the Appendix as
Model A).
Utilizing the prior research on the topic of gap years, we can better tackle the issue at
hand and construct our study to better analyze the impact that gap years can have on personal
and career-related growth. Understanding the demographics and reasons behind taking a gap
year provides us more insight into its overall significance.
 Silva 5
Literature Review on Gap Years
The Importance of the “Economy of Experience”
The rise in prominence of gap years, has led to the need to examine this phenomenon
further, to fully understand its significance, while also analyzing whether or not it serves to better
or worsen an individual’s career prospects. Scientific research has suggested that gap year
participation enhances an individual’s capital, social, and economic capital, which in turn, gives
them a competitive advantage in labor markets compared to their peers. Over time, experts have
found that the “economy of experience” through gap years has taken on a disproportionate
importance relative to just academic credentials. (Martin, 2010)) Nowadays, employers want an
individual to be well-rounded and carry with them work related experiences to complement their
academic credentials. Ultimately what decides the level of educational and career-oriented
success comes from the levels of uncertainty experienced by the individual during the gap year
and their overall motivation level.
The Importance of Having a Well-Structured Gap Year
Naturally, “gap year” experiences will differ from person to person. An individual who
has a gap year better planned out and is motivated throughout the course of the gap year to
succeed in their goals and objectives, will tend to outperform their peers. It is all relative to the
personal value gained from taking the time off to pursue other endeavors. However, it is also
important to note that there is a cost associated with taking a gap year if it does not serve to
supplement the individual’s career prospects. An “empty” gap year will ultimately force an
individual to lag behind their peers in the employment market, and it will take them longer to
recuperate the career growth and salary lost relative to their peers. Research suggests that gap
 Silva 6
years are associated with lower future earnings, where individuals earn less in their 30’s with
different degrees of severity, depending on the amount of gap years they decide to take. The
overall future earnings penalty diminishes over time, and will ultimately completely vanish by
age 40 (Bertil et al., 2006). (This is represented by the graph found in the Appendix as Model B).
Naturally speaking, postponement of enrollment reduces time spent in the labor market,
which ultimately dictates future earnings. However, it is important to note that this graph
ultimately changes depending on the level of productivity the individual is engaged in while
taking the gap year. In fact, there may be an increase in the present discounted value of lifetime
earnings if it helped an individual land a more profitable job, or enter into a career that offers
more financial benefits.
 Reasons Associated with Taking a Gap Year
According to proponents of gap years, they generally find that a gap year serves to better
an individual’s personal growth through growing maturity and mental clarity, which in turn,
helps them make wiser and more effective decisions regarding education and employment.
(Guomei & Wei, 2017). In addition, studies have shown that young individuals who have
reported taking a gap year tended to perform better than their peers based on the areas of:
performance outcomes, improved employability, soft skills, and career choice formation.
Research has shown that gap years have the ability to enhance an individual’s cultural, social,
and economic capital which directly leads to advantages in competitive education and labor
markets (Guomei & Wei, 2017, as cited in Jones, 2004).
When it comes to deciding to take a gap year, individuals may have multitudes of
different reasons for taking them. For this reason, it is important that we choose not to group all
 Silva 7
individuals who take gap years under the same umbrella. The distinction between activities
within your home country and overseas, and whether or not it is structured or unstructured is
very important in understanding the meaning and scope of the gap year. Dr. Andrew Jones from
the University of London created a model to help define how gap years can differ from an
individual to individual basis. The model has 2 different layers. The first layer defines whether or
not the individual is choosing to do their gap year at home (in his case the UK) or abroad, and
whether it will be a structured or unstructured gap year. The second layer focuses on the choice
of how the individual is planning to spend his/her gap year. The list provided within the model
includes various choices, such as: organized travel, learning, paid work, voluntary work,
independent travel, and leisure activities (Jones, 2004). (This is represented as Model C in the
Appendix).
The distinction between the type of activity, where it will take place, and whether or not
it is structured, is extremely important in determining its potential usefulness in terms of
improving an individual’s overall career prospects and employability. Undoubtedly, a more
structured plan that is more geared towards developing an individual’s career growth, will have a
greater positive impact when it comes to employability and financial return. However, it is also
important to note that other unrelated activities can still help an individual’s personal growth,
increasing levels of motivation and drive, which in turn may be a valuable asset to also have
within the workforce. If the gap year served as a means of self-discovery, it can push an
individual down a path where he/she is more motivated and passionate about their work. And
generally speaking, a more motivated and passionate individual will tend to progress farther
within their career compared to someone who is not.
Soft Skills Growth Potential Through Gap Years
 Silva 8
It is also important to consider the usefulness of “soft skills” which are many times
developed during the course of making personal growth during a gap year. Soft skills such as:
communication skills, leadership skills, language skills, and developing a strong work ethic, are
all important skills that can be developed during the gap year. It is the individual’s ability to
recognize and market these skills that will help them in regards to overall employability. As
stated by Ehrenreich, “by capturing the space of the gap year in the fold of the commodity, the
person can avoid the problem that a gap year of any kind, for any purpose is seen by employers
as being unforgiveable.” (Cremin 2007, as cited in Ehrenreich, 2006) The experience of the gap
year is utilized as a springboard to help an individual realize his/her ambitions and potential for
future success. It serves to illustrate the opportunities available to individuals who are willing to
look for them.
The Value Associated with Attaining Personal Growth
We should also consider the value of personal growth. It is impossible to objectively
quantify this. However, if the “gap year” helped an individual find a greater purpose and calling,
the satisfaction and happiness brought about in this revelation is something worth valuing. At the
end of the day, if the individual is not pursuing something they enjoy, the monetary value may be
of little significance. Overall satisfaction and happiness of one’s life, by pursuing their
endeavors, is truly more important. And one’s ability to pursue a passion in life, will increase
their likelihood to succeed in that specific area of employment. This is why, personal growth and
career growth should be valued similarly, because they are two areas that are many times
intertwined with one another.
Doing something that is worthwhile is a justifiable means for taking a gap year. In the
end, not all activities will be weighed as equal in the eyes of an employer. However, it is the
 Silva 9
responsibility of the gappers to utilize correct discourses to tell the story that will orient them
towards their future goals. (Snee, 2013)
Measuring the Intrinsic Value of Gap Years for the Individual
When it comes to taking a gap year, there are certain steps that an individual should take
to defend their time from the questioning of employers. It is important to: focus on the skills
acquired, communicate the value of your experience to employers, articulate why the gap year
was taken, and treat your experience like a job and include it as another portion of your
application materials. It is important that an individual looks at their time as something
productive in order for them to defend it accordingly. (O’Day, 2017)
It is also important for each individual to weigh the pros and cons of taking a gap year
before they decide to take one. An effective gap year is one that is well planned out and serves a
purpose to better an individual’s personal and career development. It is important to note that gap
years can be very positive for an individual because it can: help an individual gain insight about
themselves and goals through personal development, give people a break from the pressures
associated with academics and work (which in turn can result in renewed enthusiasm for
studies/work), and can offer young people real-world understanding that is simply not found in
the classroom setting.
On the other hand, it can be negative in the sense that postponing school or work takes an
individual off of a traditional path, which sometimes can make it challenging to get back into the
same rhythm post-gap year. Additionally, an unstructured gap year can leave an individual
feeling frustrated that they are not being productive with their time, which in turn could worsen
their mental state. It is crucial that the time invested in a gap year is put into good use. Overall,
 Silva 10
the better organized a gap year is, the better chance it can serve to truly better an individual’s
personal and career development. (Torpey, 2020) An effective way to start this approach is by
brainstorming and creating a list of activities and goals an individual would like to complete by a
given deadline. It is also crucial that a time table is placed in order for the individual to commit
to obtaining the goals and objectives that they sought out to accomplish.
The Value Associated with International Gap Year Experiences
Another area worth focusing on is how international experience through a gap year can
potentially help individuals searching for international employment opportunities. A year
studying or working abroad is by far one of the most reliable paths towards achieving global
competencies. Findings from the 2014 Erasmus Impact report from the European Commission
confirms that 64% of international recruiters consider extended residence abroad important,
because it shows the recruiter that the individual would be comfortable and able to work outside
of his/her comfort zone. Additionally, another study from the European Commission found that
international gappers were 50% less likely to experience long-term unemployment due to their
international experience. As stated by Lopez-Moreno, “experience of working oversees and
immersion in a different culture can catapult a graduate into being considered for rewarding and
challenging roles.” (Moreno, 2017) It is important that graduates realize that with experience
abroad, they are seen as value-added professionals that hold a unique selling point through their
international experience.
The Value of Gap Years in Academia
It also appears that universities have a favorable view towards gap years. Studies show
that gap year graduates tend to make superior students: their academics, campus involvement,
 Silva 11
and leadership tend to outperform their peers. Universities look for the most exceptional
students, and unique international experiences can undoubtedly go a long way. Gap year
graduates are known to over-perform academically by 0.45 GPA points compared to their peers
according to Chapel Hill University. Additionally, 86% of students found that their experience
had been extremely positive, and were a major factor that motivated them to finish out their
degree programs. (Knight, 2018)
Future Implementations of Gap Years
Finally, it is important that we look a bit into the future of gap years. In the United States
there is a concerted effort to make gap years compulsory for all students. Due to the increasing
polarization throughout the United States, there is a need to try and bridge the divide between
cultural America. Aside from seeing the many benefits associated with gap years (as previously
mentioned), politicians in the United States see a gap year dedicated to civic service as a means
of bringing communities together. Most recently, Beto O’Rourke has proposed a 1-year
mandatory civic duty, community service gap year for all students post-graduation from high
school (before entering University). He believes this may bring communities together for a
common cause and bridge the cultural/political divide between Americans.
There are also a handful of institutions such as: Princeton and the University of North
Carolina, who already offer aid to students who decide to defer admission by a year to pursue a
gap year. Duke University even announced that it would approve scholarships for 20 students to
take on an approved gap-year project, as a sponsored volunteer trip. In addition to this, some
Universities are even providing course credit for gap year services in partnership with an
organization connected to the school. This would provide the student with a full year of
academic credit. Making service compulsory would also eliminate the notion that gap years are
 Silva 12
only for the privileged and elite who can afford it. On a smaller level, select institutions also
announced that they would give special preference to candidates who show a willingness to serve
in a community service gap year. (Zimmerman, 2020) Given the increasingly competitive nature
of college admissions, any advantage will surely be utilized by individuals to get into their
school of choice.
Methodology
In order to gather information from my participants, my methodology consists of taking a
multiple or collective case study, qualitative approach, that studies a sequence of individual case
studies on the topic of gap years in order to better measure its overall impact on the individual
with relation to personal and career related growth (Baxter & Jack, 2008). This type of approach
was chosen due to the nature of the study. Gap year experiences tend to be subjective in nature,
and focusing on a qualitative approach that analyzes the narrative stories of the individual’s,
while focusing on connecting central themes, served to better understand and interpret the
findings from this study. It helps us better understand the “how” and “why” behind the gap
year’s overall impact on the individual’s personal and career related growth. Additionally, the
nature of interviewing and studying the cases of various individual’s, while being able to analyze
each setting of each case and across cases, highlights and defines the need to utilize a multiple
case study approach. (Baxter & Jack, as referenced in Yin (2003))
The first 6 interviews were comprised of individual interviews with students from
NOVA University. The initial 15 questions constructed for the individual students focus on
highlighting their individual stories, while also capturing the impact that their experiences had on
their overall view of gap years. The final 3 interviews were conducted with HR Department
Managers. The 7 questions posed for HR Department Managers served to better understand a
 Silva 13
gap years potential impact on an individual’s career, and serves as an important supplement to
the overall scope of the analysis. (Interview questions found in Model E and F in the Appendix)
 Because the nature of this topic has not been explored in great detail previously, few
restrictions and propositions were imposed within the methodology in order to better capture the
overall essence and significance behind the impact of gap years. In order to maintain
consistency, we looked specifically for students who have had at least 1 year of previous gap
year experiences. Because these students are still within a meaningful transition point within
their lives, it made sense that the overall impact of a gap year would be more impressionable on
them over a different subgroup of individuals. For a collective case study approach on a broad
topic, such as gap years, it is important that each individual case study is assessed and compared
to the others, in order to find principle ideas and themes that are found consistently throughout
the process. It is important to note that issues might arise in the shape of different personal
experiences. For that reason, this process looks to bridge any divides and come up with central
themes that appear consistently throughout the various case studies.
After obtaining the necessary information, a conceptual framework model was
constructed to better highlight the main ideas found from the data obtained. The model served to
highlight the factors that go into the overall changing mindsets of the individual, as to whether
the gap year experiences served to better their overall situation. Data sources in the form of
direct quotes and experiences from the individuals were used to support the central ideas and
themes found within these cases studies. A separate table summarizing each individual’s
personal experiences (in regards to personal and career related growth) was later provided, in
order to construct a short database that serves to highlight each individual’s personal
experiences. Finally, a discussion analysis chapter later on, serves as a means to dive deeper into
 Silva 14
certain themes found, while referencing support from previous studies. (Baxter & Jack, 2008).
The process highlighting the steps and methodology that were used to conduct this study can be
found in the model below found in the Appendix, under model G).
Findings from the Qualitative Case Study Analysis
Explanation of Structure
This chapter was structured in such a way that highlights common themes, in respect to gap
years, that were found throughout the course of the interviews done with students from NOVA
University and HR Department managers. These extracted themes serve to highlight the overall
impact that gap years have on personal and career-oriented growth. Both sets of interviews
contain a total of three main themes that were present throughout the entirety of the respective
group of interviews. The themes gained from interviewing NOVA students help us gain insight
into how the individual’s mindset on gap years was shaped through their personal and careeroriented growth. The interviews and themes obtained from HR department managers, later
served to further our understanding of the phenomenon of gap years, and how it impacts the
individual’s future employment prospects over time.
Individual Student Case Studies
1. Importance of challenging oneself and growing through adversity. (Personal
Growth)
One common idea that was shared throughout the sequence of mini-case studies was the idea
that there is an importance of challenging oneself in order to grow through adversity. This
personal growth manifests from an individual’s need to find self-development and fulfillment in
their daily lives. The individual’s experiences throughout the course of the gap year helped shape
 Silva 15
this idea because the experiences brought about a change in the individual’s mindset. By
overcoming uncertainty, they were able to create a more confident self, that is more easily able to
take on experiences that are away from their comfort zone.
This idea is highlighted by various individuals throughout the course of these case studies.
For example, participant #1 states: “we are the generation of individualists, and only we can be
the heroes of tomorrow. Gap years should serve to challenge you, because growth and risk are
important factors that help build our lives.” (P1) His experiences interning in a different city
away from home allowed him to grow into a more mature and able adult who has the confidence
to pursue his dreams. Like he mentions, only the individual can make the choices necessary to
improve their future self.
Participant #2 also focused a great deal of time on her own personal growth journey. Her
experiences travelling and volunteering in different countries, away from home, helped her find
out who she is today. For example, she states: “travelling around allows you to better connect
with more people, which in turn allows you to understand yourself better, while at the same time,
making more rational decisions about your life.” (P2) She goes on later to say: “I was also very
excited about the prospect of having a chance to start over and become more independent, by
going outside of my comfort zone. It makes you mentally free, since a healthy mind brings with
it a healthy life.” (P2) Personal growth through adversity is also a lifestyle that a person chooses
for themselves. The gap year can serve to reset your mindset and create a new/better lifestyle that
works best for the individual. Creating a healthy mind can help improve various other parts of
your life for the better.
It is also important to challenge one’s mindset about life in general. Participant 4’s
experience of volunteering abroad in a poor area of Indonesia helped her better prioritize her
 Silva 16
needs in life and see her current situation in life in a different way. She states: “I’m more grateful
for what we have in Europe. During my stay, donations would be collected once a month to help
the poor, and kids would have to walk 2 hours to get to school every day without shoes because
they couldn’t afford it.” (P4) This individual’s humbling experience of working with others who
are less fortunate than her, helped her better put her priorities in check. She began to realize that
one does not need a lot in life to be happy, and that it’s better to focus on the things in life that
bring you purpose.
Finally, Participant 6 also gave us his take on facing adversity through gap years. He states
that it is important to: “Have the courage to take the gap year, and use it to find your position in
the world. It is important to find something that takes you out of your comfort zone. Do
something different from what people are telling you to do. Taking on challenges helps you grow
as a person, and companies need more creative individuals.” (P6) Ultimately, a gap year can help
you find your place and value in the world. By facing adversity and challenging oneself, you are
not just improving yourself, but also your future prospects. Generally speaking, a more
passionate and motivated you, will ultimately also signal success in work environment. It is
important to see how personal growth can find its way to blend into other areas of your life as
well.
2. Importance of having a well-structured career-oriented plan (Career Growth)
Another important idea that was present throughout the sequence of mini-case studies was
the idea that a successful and meaningful gap year is one that is well structured with goals and
objectives. By having a clear path in place, it removes uncertainty and doubt from an individuals
mind, and allows them to fully accomplish what they want from the gap year. This is closely
 Silva 17
aligned with overall career growth, because one can only develop their career ambitions if they
understand what they want to try and pursue.
Having a sound structure will ultimately increase the likelihood that the gap year will be
successful from the eyes of the individual experiencing it. Participant 1 points out that: “You
should have a fixed starting point and endpoint in order to keep yourself on track. Find the
puzzle pieces to build the gap year, and have an end goal and date when you plan to finish it.
Always plan 2 steps ahead to ensure that you are never left in a situation where you don’t know
what to do.” (P1) It is important to recognize that the individual is responsible for building the
value of their gap year. Having it setup in such a way where the individual is not wasting time
and unsure as to what they should be doing, will help them accomplish clear career-oriented
goals and objectives.
Participant 3 goes further into this topic by reiterating that the value of a gap year comes
from what the individual decides to do. If they have no plans or objectives, they will simply be
killing time for the sake of killing time. She ultimately would advise others to: “take a gap year,
as long as they know what they are doing. And advises other individuals to not rush into the
process and consider what options would best suit their needs before entering into a gap year
(P3)
Finally, it is important to note that the experience gained through gap year exposure (via
internships or other work-related activities) will also serve to place them on a better overall
career path. As stated by Participant 6, “It was especially important for me to gain practical
experience in order to complement the theory I’ve already obtained in school. Additionally, it
allowed me to focus more on my personal career progression and find a specific career that
might work for me.” (P6) Taking a gap year ultimately allowed him to better utilize his Master’s
 Silva 18
degree as a tool to supplement his career. He was able to do this because he already experienced
that career path first-hand, and is more confident to realize his career ambitions. Instead of taking
random classes in University, he already had specific interests related to the career that he
wanted to pursue.
3. Idea of investing in the present self for future growth
Finally, another key idea presented in the narrative stories of these individuals was the idea
that an individual needs to invest in their present self in order to obtain future growth and
success. For example, the experiences through gap years allowed the individuals to obtain both
personal and career growth that will help them in their future endeavors. For example,
Participant 1 mentions that “The degree becomes a more useful tool when you know the best
way to use it, in order to further your knowledge about your career interests.” (P1) By investing
his time in truly understanding what career works best for him, he was able to utilize his degree
as a tool to complement his intended career path. If he had not done this, he would perhaps be
pursuing a career that was not suitable for him, and would pick classes that didn’t motivate his
core interests.
Participant 5 also mentions how working specific internships during her gap year shined light
on a different career path that was more suitable for her. “She found that she didn’t want to work
in the sales industry, but instead more in consultancy.” (P5) Instead of doing work in the
automobile sales industry, she found that her greater interests revolved around the idea of
working in consultancy. This change was only able to occur because she took the time to intern
within the automobile industry and work through different business positions. Having first-hand
practical experience and knowledge about the work made her more confident in pursuing a
 Silva 19
specific career path. As she later states, “if not for the gap years, she would still be uncertain as
to what her true calling was.” (P5)
Finally, Participant 6 does a good job of highlighting the significance of taking a gap year.
He states: “When taking a gap year, you are taking one step back and two steps forward.” (P6) It
might appear that the individual is putting their career or educational prospects on hold, but in
reality the individual is instead creating a feasible path for future growth for their personal and
career-oriented lives. Investing in oneself is the only guarantee in life for future growth.
Individual HR Department Manager Case Studies
1. The importance of not judging the value of an individual’s gap year without actually
understanding it first.
One key idea that recruiters focused on throughout the interviews was about the importance
of not judging the value of an individual’s gap year without actually understanding it first. By
having experiences with individuals who have taken gap years in the past, they understand the
importance of listening to the experiences and different perspectives that an individual has to
offer. This is first expressed with Participant #7, an HR representative. She states: “Being
surrounded by different cultures and ways of thinking has opened my perspective, which has also
translated to my views on gap years in general. Everyone has different experiences in life, so it is
important to treat each person as an individual and really get to know them during the interview
process before judging their character.” (Participant #7)
It is important to note that unique experiences through gap years is still weighed and valued
by recruiters. However, it does depend largely on the open-mindedness of the recruiter and their
own personal experiences and viewpoints on the topic of gap years. This mentality is also shared
 Silva 20
by Participant #9 who states: “It is best to not “assume why the individual took the gap year.” It
is something that would catch my attention, and I would usually dig a bit deeper to see the
reasoning behind the gap year in the resume.” (Participant #9) It is important to note that many
recruiters will instead see it as an opportunity to analyze further the basis for the nature of the
gap year. It will certainly raise a flag that is worth further investigating. This is why the
individual should be prepared to justify the reasoning behind the gap. However, it is reassuring
that taking a gap year is not detrimental towards an applicant’s prospect of obtaining a job
opportunity.
2. Importance of marketing your gap year, and using it as something constructive that
can help a company.
One idea that was heavily mentioned throughout the interviews with recruiters was about the
importance of marketing one’s gap year, and using it as something constructive that can help
supplement the needs of the company. The best way to do this according to Participant #8 is to
bridge the connection yourself. She states: “It is important that you do your best to connect your
experiences as something constructive that can help the company.” (Participant #8) It is
important that the individual’s unique experiences are showcased as something that helped their
ability to grow their career-based knowledge and abilities. There are also specific types of gap
years and practices that can better showcase this. Participant #8 later goes on to state: “If it
connects to your career progression it can be helpful. It might be better to simply work a position
during that year whether an internship or job in order to gain valuable practical experience and
learn more about what you want out of your career. This will also place you in a better position
when dealing with recruiters.” (Participant #8)
 Silva 21
Having direct career related work experience will undoubtedly have a more favorable impact
on the eyes of employers. However, it is important that the individual first have a concrete
career-oriented plan before trying this. Entering into certain career-oriented plans without
preparation can cause someone to struggle and potentially fail out. If a future employer see’s this
on a resume, it may raise additional red flags that can hinder the applicant’s chances of getting
the job.
3. Concern that too many unproductive gap years will raise problems regarding the
individual’s work ethic, and have to start lagging behind their peers.
A final idea that was consistently discussed throughout the interviews was about the concern
related to an individual having too many unproductive gap years that will ultimately raise
problems regarding the individual’s overall work ethic. This is one of the potential negative
consequences associated with taking unproductive gap years. As Participant #8 states: “It is
better to not fall into a disadvantaged state before applying for a position. It is important for the
candidate to think about their career prospects and not waste valuable time.” (Participant #8)
It is important to note that for each unproductive gap year (career-wise) means the individual
will fall behind their peers by that amount of time (career-wise) which may continue to affect
them later on in life. However, when it comes to overall career growth, Participant #9 advises
that she: “I would rather see an individual utilizing a meaningful gap year, than just jumping
around through random jobs for a short period of time. If the individual is switching between
jobs often, I will begin to question if the person experienced problems at other jobs, and quits
often or was fired from them.” (Participant #9)
 Silva 22
It is important that the individual is serious and motivated before entering a specific career.
Quitting from various jobs or getting fired from them can actually create future problems
because it raises red flags for future employers that the individual is not dedicated to their work
ethic, and brings with them the risk of potentially leaving in the short-term. At the same time,
taking too many gap years without doing anything that is productive career-wise can also raise
problems. As Participant #9 later states: “I find that employers want to see that an individual is
committed to the company and their work. Wasting a considerable amount of time taking several
gap years could ultimately raise a red flag for employers that you lack a serious work ethic.”
(Participant #9) This is why having a serious, well-structured and thought out gap year plan can
help avoid these issues, and can in many ways enhance your career prospects, if they are career
oriented.
Discussion of Research on Gap Years
Discussion and Analysis of Findings
Throughout the course of the interviews there has been a consistent theme that “gap
years” served to improve the individual’s personal and career development. Generally speaking,
the individuals felt that the progress they made during their gap year work experiences far
surpassed their expectations. Individuals who took on internships found themselves more
confident in their ability to continue pursuing a career path, after already having knowledge
about what they would be getting themselves into. Additionally, it helped them better utilize their
Master’s program as a tool to help further their studies in a subject matter they were already
interested in. Without taking this opportunity for personal/career development, they would have
found themselves unable to pursue a career interest/passion.
 Silva 23
It is also important to consider the personal development that took place which allowed
them to pursue their career dreams. The gap year experience forced many individuals to go
outside their comfort zone and face adversity, which in turn allowed them to gain the confidence
in themselves to pursue what they want in life. It is important to note that personal and career
development are intertwined with one another. Improvements in regards to personal development
can create a clearer and more focused mind that enables individuals to make more sound career
decisions for themselves. And unlike career development, personal development cannot be
quantified by a salary amount or career position. Instead, we must also value how the “gap year”
made the individual feel about themselves. If the individual feels genuinely happier and more
focused at the end of the “gap year”, we must illustrate that as a compelling strength and positive
aspect of taking a gap year. From the interviews conducted it appears that aside from making
career progress, each individual was able to leave the “gap year” in a better overall state of mind.
This illustrates yet another great strength associated with taking a gap year.
When it comes to HR Managers, their viewpoint appears to be that “gap years” can be a
useful tool if utilized in such a way that can supplement their resume and career prospects. It will
be a topic discussed by recruiters in an interview, so it is important that individuals are prepared
to justify the time spent during the “gap year.” A well-structured plan in place before entering
into a gap year would best increase the likelihood of the gap year being an asset to put on a
resume, rather than a liability. It was also interesting how the HR Managers discussed the topic
of “gap years” as being a subjective topic for a recruiter, depending on their personal
experiences. Older recruiters with little knowledge on the concept of “gap years”, who have little
experience travelling abroad and deviating from a structured path, will undoubtedly be more
 Silva 24
critical about time being used for a “gap year.” But, as gap years become more popular, and time
progresses, there undoubtedly will be a greater emphasis and value on the “gap year” experience.
It is important to note that not all “gap years” are created equal. Each individual has
different perspectives and experiences in life, but a well-thought out and planned gap year will
undoubtedly yield better results than the counterpart. It is also important to consider that there is
a privilege gap associated with taking a gap year. This is a topic that many individuals mentioned
within the interview. Not every individual has the financial means and family support necessary
to be able to take a “gap year.” This is why it is important that the choice of “gap years” become
more accessible for more people. As previously mentioned, there are efforts from government
officials and Universities throughout the world to try and normalize the idea of doing a gap year,
while also providing scholarship and course credit incentives for doing so. This is an important
step in trying to make a productive “gap year” a normal experience/option for all individuals
who are searching for personal and career development that is simply not offered in the
traditional education system.
Further Analysis through Data Models
From the data collected of the interviews along with additional research on the topic, I
have created a table showcasing the personal and career growth that each individual experienced,
along with an assessment about their changing mentality on the topic of gap years. (Model H in
Appendix). What we ultimately find is that each individual’s personal and career related
experiences helped shape their opinion about gap years. All individuals went into the gap year
with little expectations, and left feeling it had a profound impact on their lives. From this
information, we find that there was undoubtedly a change in mentality on the topic of gap years,
over the course of their personal experiences. A conceptual model was created to showcase this
 Silva 25
idea. What we find in the model is that there are 2 different aspects that influence the mindset of
an individual about gap years; personal growth and career growth. Within these two areas, there
are specific features that differ between each other, along with factors that they share in common
with. It is also important to note that there are factors intertwined between both personal growth
and career growth; they include: increased motivation, purpose, and passion. These three areas
can help with an individual’s personal growth, but it can also help them when pursuing their
career ambitions. The impact of all these factors, or the lack thereof, will shape the individual’s
opinion on the topic of gap years, and cause them to think of it as something positive or negative.
(Model I can be found in the Appendix below).
Reflections on Prior Theory
The overall results of the study in many ways reflects prior theory on the subject matter.
For instance, the idea that gap years can serve to enhance an individual’s personal and career
development is connected to prior research conducted by Martin, who found that the “economy
of experience” through gap years was responsible for enhancing various forms of capital, at the
individual, social, and economic level. (Martin, 2010). Another major finding that is
substantiated by prior research is the idea that a structured gap year influences the level of
success the individual experienced. Dr. Andrew Jones’ creates this distinction in his model (as
previously mentioned) in order to measure the nature of the gap year to predict overall success.
All student participants within my study had specific goals and objectives in mind with (for the
most part) a clear path to achieve them. Research conducted by Torpey further elaborates that the
better organized the gap year, the better overall chance it serves to truly better the individual’s
personal and career development (Torpey, 2020). When it comes to the results related to the
interviews with HR Department Managers, one idea that came about from the research was the
 Silva 26
need to essentially market your gap year to employers in a constructive way that showcases your
newly obtained skills and perspective. This is further substantiated by O’Day’s research on the
topic, where he discusses the importance of doing so, while also highlighting the need for the
individual to look at their time as something productive in order for them to defend it
accordingly (O’Day, 2017). This is important, because without having this mindset, the
individual will be unable to extract value in their gap year experiences. It is important that the
individual focuses a good amount of time on introspection during the gap year to fully
understand its impact, along with the skills and abilities obtained from said experiences.
At the end of our analysis, we find that gap years had a significant positive impact on the
individual’s personal and career-oriented growth. Because of their positive experiences, the
individual’s ultimately left with the mindset that taking a “gap year” serves an investment
towards better future prospects. A summarized version of the findings discussed throughout this
discussion section can be found as Model J in the Appendix below.
Limitations & Plans for future Research
A topic such as gap years presents itself with many limitations, because it is difficult to
quantify the overall impact that a gap year can have on an individual. Each individual will have a
different experience throughout their gap year journey. And ultimately what brings one
individual a sense of satisfaction and purpose may not be the same for someone else. We must
also take note that financial ability/resources may also limit the quality of the gap year, or may
potentially prevent an individual from taking a gap year entirely. Additionally, there may be a
bias in the individual’s willing to open-up about their gap year experiences. Individuals who
experienced a greater impact from the “gap year experience” would most likely be more willing
to share their experiences, compared to others. I believe further research into the psychological
 Silva 27
component of gap years (focusing on the positive and negative aspects of taking a gap year)
along with research regarding gap year affordability is necessary in order to more accurately
assess its overall value. Future research of longitudinal studies regarding the individual’s
development post-gap year experience would also be interesting. Capturing information, via
journaling, about individual’s at different points beyond their gap year experience could shine
light on the potential long-term effects of gap years on personal and career-related development.
Conclusion
In conclusion, from the data obtained we find that a gap year has the potential to have
profound impacts on an individual’s life. From the data collected we were able to prove that
there was indeed a change in the individual’s perception on the impact and value of their gap
year through personal experiences. All of our student participants found that their experiences
were ultimately better than they could have anticipated. In each case, individual’s provided
examples of both personal and career related growth that came about from their gap year
experiences. Although individuals prioritized one form of growth over the other, there was still
shared growth that impacted other areas of their lives that they had not initially anticipated.
When it came to potential impacts on career development, via interviews from HR Department
Managers, we found that gap years typically do not have a noticeable negative impact on career
development as long as it is well-structured. A lack of structure and time orientation can lead to
the individual losing out on career opportunities and can potentially create a wage gap between
the individual and his/her peers. Perhaps the biggest takeaway from these interviews was the
importance of having a well-structured gap year that sets clear personal and career-oriented goals
and objectives with a set time table. Ultimately the more that the individual prepares for the gap
year, the higher chance the gap year will serve to better the individual’s overall prospects.
 Silva 28
Appendix A: Data Models
Motivating Factors behind Gap Years
(Martin, 2010)
(MODEL A)
Estimated Returns from Non-Productive Gap Years
(Bertil et al., 2006)
(MODEL B)
 Silva 29
(Jones, 2004)
Multi-layer Gap Year Experience Data Model
(MODEL C)
(Wu, 2015)
Push-Pull Gap Year Factor Model
(MODEL D)
 Silva 30
Student Interview Questions:
1) What led you to make the decision to take a gap year?
2) What does a gap year mean to you?
3) How did you spend your gap year? What activities/work did you engage in?
4) Did the gap year help you reassess your career goals and objectives?
5) Did you view the time you spent during your gap year as a productive/positive experience?
6) Do you regret not doing/accomplishing something during your gap year?
7) Do you believe your gap year negatively impacted your career prospects in any way?
8) Do you think employers look at a gap year in a negative light?
9) How do you believe most people view the concept of “taking a gap year.”
10) Did your opinion on “gap years” change after employment? (Professionals question)
11) How has your opinion of gap years changed over the years (if at all)?
12) What do you believe is the publics overall sentiment towards gap years? Were most people
supportive towards you? Did you face any backlash?
13) What advice would you give an individual considering taking a gap year?
14) Do you feel that in the future there will be more individuals looking to take a gap year?
15) Is there anything you would tell your past self before taking a gap year?
(Model E)
 HR Department Manager Questions:
1) Can you explain the process by which recruitment is done at your company? Are there criteria/features
that your company looks for in a candidate?
2) How does your HR department view a gap year on someone’s resume? Do you think it can have a
negative impact on a person’s career prospects, if it doesn’t align with their intended career path?
3) Over more recent years, have you seen an increase in the amount of “gap years” you find on someone’s
resume?
4) Do you feel all elements of a person’s resume should be geared towards the job they are applying for?
5) Did your HR department ever view a candidate’s “separate experiences” through a gap year as
beneficial? Can it help differentiate an individual from other applicants?
6) Do you think taking a gap year can help someone better understand his career goals and objectives?
7) What advice would you give someone who is thinking of taking a gap year? Would
you advise against it?
(Model F)
 Silva 31
Methodological Process of Study
Model G
 Silva 32
Gap Year Data Table
Name Personal Growth Career
Growth
Change in mentality over gap
years
Participant #1 Experienced personal growth
by feeling more independent
and confident by interning in
Munich and living on his
own.
Internships allowed him to
better understand a career
within the automotive
industry; increased value
on resume.
Has a better view of gap years
because of the successful
internships he had done, which
solidified his career interest
when entering his Masters.
Participant #2 Was able to recover from
school burnout and through
volunteer work was able to
find a greater purpose in life.
Helped her decide to get
into Business/Corporate
Sustainability in order to
make an environmental
difference within society.
Her many different
experiences during her gap
year (especially in regards to
personal development) was life
altering and allowed her to
have a very favorable view of
gap years.
Participant #3 Was able to gain confidence
in herself by ignoring what
other people were thinking
and focused on developing
herself as a strong forwardthinking person.
Managed to work in
various different retail and
managing jobs which
helped build her resume
and allowed her to gain
experience in several
business type roles.
After going through her gap
year, she realized its value in
its ability to allow her to
mature as a person and create a
lifestyle and career plan that
works for her.
Participant #4 Her first gap year allowed
her to develop into a
confident and independent
person; while her second gap
year helped broaden her
viewpoint about different
cultures and ways of
thinking. She takes less
things for granted.
Her unique experiences
allowed her to focus on a
career/lifestyle that would
better meet her needs. She
is now more passionate
about working in a
business field that allows
her to make a difference.
Her gap year allowed her to
gain a completely different
perspective on life; making her
feel like she should become a
positive force for change. She
now values a gap year more
because it helped shape who
she is today.
Participant #5 Her first gap year after high
school helped her better
orient her life and set future
goals that she wanted to
accomplish. It served to
better improve her self-worth
and motivation.
Her second gap year after
bachelor’s program
allowed her to work in 2
internships for the
automotive industry.
Helped build her resume
and gain insight into a
career she was interested
in.
She gained a much greater
appreciation for a gap year
between doing the 2 separate
gap years. The first one
provided her with mental
clarity, while the second one
helped solidify a career path.
Participant #6 Traveling abroad to places
like Australia and Indonesia
during his gap year made him
more culturally aware and
connected to the world
around him. It helped him
grow into a more confident
and independent adult.
The second gap year
helped him solidify his
interest in business by
taking on various
internships outside of his
comfort zone in different
countries. Allowed him to
gain an international
business perspective.
The gap years provided him
cultural awareness and
valuable business insight. The
overall value of his
experiences far exceeded his
expectations.
(Model H)
 Silva 33
Interpretive Gap Year Data Model
(Model I)
 Silva 34
Summarized Main Findings
(Model J)
 Silva 35
APPENDIX B: NARRATIVE STORIES
Descriptive Stories on Gap Years
Participant #1
The first individual I interviewed decided to take a gap year in between his bachelors and
masters studies. He ultimately saw himself continuing his studies, but opted to do an internship with
BMW, in Munich, shortly after the completion of his bachelors’ thesis. He was eventually offered a fulltime position, but instead opted to go for another 6-month internship with Porsche, with the ultimate
goal to continue his graduate studies in the fall semester of 2019. After doing multiple internships within
the automotive industry, he felt a strong desire to continue working in the same industry postcompletion of his Masters studies. Ultimately, he found that “internships during his gap year gave
practical experience to see how he can leverage his strengths from his undergraduate degree in the real
world.” The practical experience was ultimately necessary to insure he understood what a career path
within the automotive industry would entail. When asking him to define what a gap year meant for him,
he described a productive gap year as “one that constitutes that an individual will do something after it,
by having clear goals and objectives in place to insure personal and career related growth.” He found
that the combination of studies and work was very important in order to accomplish said personal
objectives. Additionally, by doing the internships, he was able to pinpoint what type of Master’s degree,
courses, and specializations he wanted to take while studying. This would not have been possible if he
had not taken the gap year to learn more about the automotive industry. Ultimately, he feels that “the
degree becomes a more useful tool when you know the best way to use it, in order to further your
knowledge about your career interests.”
When asking Participant #1 about his experiences with gap years, he ultimately found them to
be very positive. He found that he had learned a lot from the experience, and that the internships had
challenged him in a very constructive way that will surely help his future career growth. He did also
mention that there are drawbacks associated with taking gap years and doing internships. Because he
had not opted to work a normal position out of college, or continue his studies, he found that there was
ultimately a cost associated in partaking in internships. Firstly, in order to work his two internships, he
had to travel to Munich from Frankfurt (which is roughly 250 miles) and rent out an apartment within
the city. This was very expensive, and the minimum wage he was making at the internship did not cover
the majority of his expenses. He ultimately believes that there is a financial burden associated with gap
years in general, and that without extra financial support from family, taking a gap year may not even be
a feasible option for some students. When asked if he had any regrets associated with his gap year, he
answered that he did not, because he felt that he exceeded all possible expectations. He also felt that
employers will look at his “gap year” in a positive light because he used it as something productive to
help boost his career prospects. He said that as long as you’re doing something exciting or different that
will help you stand out against your colleagues, it would not be seen as a waste of time. The problem
 Silva 36
generally only stems from individuals who choose to do nothing productive with their time during the
gap year.
When asking Participant #1 what he felt most individuals thought about the concept of “taking a
gap year”, he answered that most people within the business world will see it as a positive/constructive
experience, since most business students will have things strategically planned to help them in the longrun. There are also many factors that go into the decision of taking a gap year, so everyone will have
their own interpretation for what a gap year means to them. He stated that “we are the generation of
individualists, and only we can be the heroes of tomorrow. Gap years should serve to challenge you,
because growth and risk are important factors that help build our lives.” I also asked him if his thoughts
of gap years had changed after employment status. He said that his perception had changed quite a bit
after his work experiences. He began to value more the need to take constructive steps to better
understand what you see yourself doing in the future. He ultimately found that gap years are extremely
good for individuals who are still uncertain as to what they should be doing in the future. Without
practical experience, you will never truly know what is right for you.
I also asked Participant #1 what he interpreted society felt about the concept of “taking a gap
year.” He concluded that society is indifferent, as long as you are doing something that is both positive
and constructive for your life. Most people were very supportive towards him, and his family was able to
help fund his stay at Munich for both internships. However, he conceded that he would have most likely
faced much more backlash if he did not have a concrete plan for his gap year. When asking what advice
he would give someone considering taking a gap year, he answered that “it depends on the
circumstance. If you have certain aspirations for companies, it might be better to study. You should have
a fixed starting point and endpoint in order to keep yourself on track. Find the puzzle pieces to build the
gap year, and have an end goal and date when you plan to finish it. Always plan 2 steps ahead to insure
that you are never left in a situation where you don’t know what to do.” Upon asking him whether or
not he felt that there would be more individuals taking gap years in the future, he answered, “it will
arise, because all jobs nowadays want practical experience. You can hardly get practical experience
through academics, so industry internships through gap years are necessary to meet those
prerequisites.” Finally, I asked him if he had any regrets associated with his gap year. He stated that “he
did not have any regrets, and would in fact encourage others to give a gap year a chance.”
Participant #2
Participant #2 ultimately decided to take a gap year because of financial reasons, since the tuition
fees for a Master’s degree was very expensive, and she wanted to ensure that the money going into it
would be used correctly. Additionally, she was feeling burned out from the bachelor’s program, and was
uncertain as to what her true calling was. She needed more time to reflect and felt that travel would
help her in this regard. She described that, for her, a gap year was basically “taking a break from
something you have been doing for a long time, in order to explore yourself and your needs and
interests.” During her gap year she worked in many unrelated jobs which allowed her to travel around
and take on new experiences. She worked for the European Voluntary Service in 2017, where she spent
7 months with an NGO in Lisbon, Portugal, working in a social project involving early education. She also
 Silva 37
spent some time working a part-time job in an ALDO shoe store, working in Maritime safety in Lisbon,
and finally decided to work for another separate public agency in Malta afterwards. When asked if the
gap years helped her reassess her career goals and objectives, she stated that it definitely had because
she was confused after her bachelor’s degree, and in hindsight wishes she took a gap year before her
Bachelors program in order to better understand her true calling. She strongly believes that if she
“travelled around before, it would have allowed her to connect with more people, which in turn would
have helped her make more rational decisions about her life.” She was only able to pinpoint what she
wanted to do after taking the gap year. She now envisions herself working in the area of corporate
sustainability, combining environment with business.
When asked whether she views her gap years as a positive experience, she stated that “it was
definitely a positive experience.” She had the chance to meet many different people, made many
connections, and now has multiple good references for future job opportunities. In terms of selfdevelopment/growth it had also helped a lot, since it now allows her to prioritize and value more of
what she has in life. She feels that students and teachers focus too much in academia and theory, and
that a practical component is necessary in order to fully understand what is right for you. When asked
whether or not she regretted not doing/accomplishing something during her gap year, she stated that
she felt that what she did was very rewarding and important for her personal growth, but she did regret
not spending 6 months volunteering in South America, since she has passion for travelling and would
have loved to be more involved in different communities. However, she did recognize that more money
would be needed to accomplish this goal.
When asked whether or not she felt that her gap year negatively impacted her career prospects in
any way, she stated that she did not feel that it would have a negative impact. She didn’t know what she
wanted to do, and lives with the mentality that “everything happens for a reason.” However, she does
recognize that she might not be able to take part in business-oriented internships since they are
primarily offered to individuals under the age of 25. She also feels that “employers in the business world
may be a bit stricter in terms of what they want in a resume, but at the same time, having components
that help differentiate you from others is always a good thing. Nowadays companies value different
components of an applicant.” When asked how she felt most people viewed the concept of “taking a
gap year”, she stated that “some see it as a self-development thing and admire it, while others find it
lazy and ineffective.” Overall, she felt that opinions were pretty split on the topic. She also remained
having positive feelings towards “gap years” after employment. She stated that in the beginning she was
“very excited about the prospect of having a chance to start over and be more independent, by going
outside of her comfort zone.”
When asked whether or not people were supportive towards her decision to take gap years, she
stated that her parents were a bit hesitant because she had been diagnosed with a health condition, and
her Mom specifically did not see it as a stable path for her future. Her parents saw it as a waste of time.
However, her friends were a lot more supportive, and helped her look at the long-term benefits of
taking a gap year. She found it to be a liberating experience to go abroad, since she had no obligations
to anyone, but herself. She stated that “it makes you mentally free, since a healthy mind brings with it a
healthy life.” Now studying at NOVA, she still misses a bit of the liberty she had when taking her gap
year. After asking what advice she would give to individuals considering taking a gap year, she advised
them to “do it. They would consider it because they feel like they need to take a break. Ultimately trust
your gut instinct and put yourself first.” When asked whether or not she felt that in the future there
 Silva 38
would be more individuals looking to take gap years, she stated that “curiosity is driving young people,
and society is so fast paced now. Unless you can work in that environment, a lot of people need time to
focus on themselves. Fortunately, more people have a means to travel and experience new things in this
day and age.” Nicollette also mentioned that studying abroad in Portugal helped her find a culture that
better suits her needs, and is looking forward to potentially working and living in Southern Europe in the
future. Finally, when asked whether or not there was anything she would tell her past self before taking
a gap year, she said that she would tell herself to “not worry too much and go with the flow. It’s easy to
get anxious about a lot of things in life, but the anxiety about the future only holds you back.”
Participant #3
Participant #3 is another student from NOVA University, who is from the United States. When
asked what ultimately led her to the decision to take a gap year, Participant #3 stated that she needed a
year off from studies to try and discover herself and decide what exactly she wanted to pursue in the
long-term. She previously had the opportunity to study abroad in Spain for a semester, and enjoyed the
prospect of traveling outside the United States to pursue graduate studies. In the beginning of her gap
year, in order to get away from everything, she decided to go to the Netherlands to visit family. After
returning and feeling recharged, she took a remote job for 6-7 months, this gave her the flexibility to
better manage her free time, in a way that would be most beneficial for her. She later took on other part
time jobs to save up more money, and spent time reconnecting with friends and family. When asked
what a “gap year” meant to her, she stated that it is “the time you take during the year to better
understand yourself and make future decisions.”
When asked whether or not the gap year helped her reassess her career goals and objectives,
she claimed that it did, and that “she wouldn’t be in the same positive place now without taking the
break.” It also allowed her to further build her resume by taking on a variety of jobs including working
retail jobs, becoming a swimming pool manager, and finally working for a cyber security company in the
area of market research. When asked if she viewed her time during the gap year as a productive and
positive experience, she answered “It definitely did. Although it wasn’t easy, it helped me question
myself about my purpose and what I should be doing in life. It is especially hard when you start
comparing yourself to your friends that seemingly have their lives in order.” But, overall she did not
have any regrets, because she was able to accomplish many things during her gap year. When asked
whether or not the gap year would have a negative impact on her career prospects, she answered
“partially yes and no.” Since she was still being productive by working jobs it is something you can add to
your resume, although not all of the work she did may directly translate to a future job. She feels that
some companies may question why she wasn’t advancing her career, but at the end of the day she
needed to better understand herself before making a huge financial decision by choosing to continue
her studies toward a graduate degree. Overall, she feels that if you advocate for why you took off the
gap year, you can ultimately turn it into something positive, when questioned by a future employer.
However, if you didn’t do anything, it would probably be very difficult to justify the wasted time to your
employer.
 Silva 39
When later asked what she felt most people think about the term “gap years”, she stated that
“it varies from continent to continent, and country to country. For example, in the United States it is
very rare for people to take gap years, while in Europe it is a lot more common because people better
welcome the idea.” When asked if her opinion of gap years changed after her employment, she stated
that it had changed in the sense that there was a huge focus by people to start saving towards your
401K retirement fund and to be ultimately financially sound. She initially did not go into the gap year
with that mentality. When asked if she had faced any backlash for deciding to take a gap year, she
stated that it was quite the opposite. In fact, her immediate friends were quite supportive and her
parents also advised her to do it, saying that they themselves had made a mistake by jumping into
careers too early in life. Overall, she would advise others to also take a gap year, as long as they know
what they are doing. She advises other individuals to not rush into the process and consider what
options would best suit their needs before entering into a gap year. But, at the end of the day it depends
on the individual interests and desires. She also stated that her one regret during her gap year was
“caring about what others thought.” Her concern about other people’s opinions held her back a little,
and she would advise her past self to not fall into the same trap. When asked if she felt that more
people would decide to take gap years, she stated that she thinks that “Covid-19 will allow individuals to
think more about living in the moment, which might help change people’s attitudes about gap years in
general. They can use some of the free time now for personal rediscovery.”
Participant #4
Participant #4 had two separate gap year experiences. At the age of 16, she decided to go
abroad and study in Ireland, where she lived with a host family. She went to a very conservative all-girls
school/monastery, but she felt it was fairly easy to adapt due to similarities in culture. After high school,
at the age of 19, she decided to go to Indonesia through a German organization, equivalent to the Peace
Corps. There, she worked in an after-school program for kids and young adults. She was there to
manage the school program during her 1-year stay. Culturally speaking, Indonesia fulfilled the new
experiences she wanted; getting immersed into the culture. She partook in weddings and other
activities, but found it difficult to establish strong friendships due to her more introverted nature. When
defining what a gap year meant to her, she stated that “a gap year has to do with gaining new
experiences and broadening horizons. Volunteering and going into different experiences.” She felt that
overall the gap year in Indonesia did more to broaden her horizons due to how culturally different the
country was. By managing a school program there, she realized that she would later go into
International Communications Management for her Bachelors. She later continued her studies at NOVA
by focusing on International Management. Indonesia also showcased issues related to sustainability,
which later spurred an interest in her to continue studying the topic in college. Her gap year made her
“more grateful for what we have in Europe. During my stay, donations would be collected once a month
to help the poor, and kids would have to walk 2 hours to get to school every day without shoes because
they couldn’t afford it.” Aside from helping with her career objectives, her gap year made her value the
many things that most people take for granted every day, while living in a first world country.
 Silva 40
Overall, she found her experiences to be positive and helped shape her goals and objectives for
the future. She does not have any regrets about her experiences, and lives by the motto that
“everything happens for a reason.” She also feels that her experiences through gap years helped her get
into NOVA, and will probably help her when seeking a job in the future. When it comes to taking a gap
year, she feels that as long as you are doing something productive with your time, employers will
generally look at it in a favorable light. When asked whether she feels that gap years are seen in a
favorable light, she said that it depends by country. But, being from Germany, she found that many of
the people she knows have also taken gap years to help further themselves personally. Her opinions on
gap years has always remained very positive, but her family did worry about her stay in Indonesia, and
all the vaccinations she had to get before going there. When asked what advice she would give others
considering taking a gap year, she advised them to “ask themselves why they want to do a gap year and
have everything planned out at least a semester in advance.” When it comes to the future of gap years,
she feels that it will be very dependent on the current virus (COVID-19) and the economy, because there
is a large cost associated with taking gap years, and not everyone is able to afford it. Finally, when asked
what advice she would give her past self, she stated that it is “best to tell yourself to not worry. Reassure
yourself that you are doing the right thing and take it day by day.”
Participant #5
Participant #5 decided to take 2 separate gap years. The first one happened after high school
because she didn’t know what exactly she wanted to study. After completing her bachelors’ program,
she took another gap year to complete two 6-month internships. She defines a gap year as “an
experience of personal growth, focusing on finding more about yourself.” She spent her first gap year
travelling around Australia working at an oyster farm and studying a bit. It offered her the time to reflect
more about what she wanted in life. The second gap year was primarily focused on internships for
automotive companies like BMW and Porsche. When asked whether or not it had helped her reassess
her career goals and objectives, she said that it changed her focus in business from Marketing to
Management. She found that she didn’t want to work in the industry, but instead more in consultancy.
The first gap year helped her get out of her comfort zone (more for personal growth), while the second
one was more career-oriented growth. When asked if she saw her gap years as positive experiences, she
said “yes, and I wouldn’t change it for anything. The future is uncertain, so it’s simply better to go for it.”
She does not believe the gap years affected her negatively in any meaningful way, because if not for the
gap years, she would still be uncertain as to what her true calling was. It allowed for great personal and
career-oriented growth.
When asked whether or not she felt that employers would look at “gap years” in a negative
light, she stated that it depends on the experiences. But, believes that outside experiences show
creativity and a more interesting side of you to the employer. She believes that society see’s taking a
gap year as a privilege, but one that can truly help better a person’s situation in life. She has always
remained very consistent in her beliefs that gap years are generally a positive experience for individuals.
She also found that most people were very supportive towards her ambitions and were genuinely
curious about her new experiences. When asked what advice she would give individuals considering
taking a gap year, she advised them to “think what they want to get out of the year. Have a goal before
 Silva 41
doing the gap year and plan for the future. Being stuck in one position is stressful, so set a time frame
for yourself and make sure you have an endpoint.” When asked whether or not there would be more
individuals taking gap years in the future, she believes that “pre-COVID19, yes, especially since the
majority of her friends have taken gap years and had positive experiences.” Finally, she would advise her
past self to be more confident and have things a little bit better planned out before taking a gap year.
“But, in the end, the risk will be worth it.”
Participant #6
Participant #6 is a German student at NOVA who took 2 different gap years, 1 after high school,
and the second after his bachelor’s studies. He felt a lack of orientation after high school and used his
first gap year as a period for rediscovery and enlightenment. In school he did not know what he wanted
to study and had a lot of theoretical knowledge, but didn’t know where the practical knowledge would
take him. This is why his gap years were split up in 2 phases, for completely different reasons. In the first
six months of his initial gap year he decided to travel and visit Australia, while occasionally taking up
small jobs at local farms whenever he felt he was beginning to run low on financial resources. This
allowed him to reflect on what he should be doing in his life, and brought him a new level of focus on
personal development. It helped him step out of his comfort zone by taking a big risk, and overall made
him a much more confident person. During his second gap year, in the first 6-month period, he decided
to travel to Vietnam, where he had previously studied abroad, and interned with a German company. He
later continued his internship experiences at Accenture in Germany where he pursued his interest in
consultancy. This was especially important for him to gain practical experience in order to complement
the theory he had already obtained in school. Additionally, it allowed him to focus more on his personal
career progression and find a specific career that might work for him.
When asked what a “gap year” means to him, he stated that it was “a deviation from your
current norm/studies in pursuit of something different.” At the same time, he discussed that a “gap
year” typically has a negative connotation because it makes it seem as though there would be a “gap in
your resume, and implies that you didn’t really do anything.” He also stated that there would be many
opportunity costs associated with taking gap years, both financially and career-wise. But, he ultimately
felt that self-reflection was very important to fully understand what he wanted to do, and thus he does
not feel like he missed out on anything because he had certain goals and objectives in mind. He also
believes that “companies are not looking for people who perfectly go through Bachelors and Masters”,
because they lack independence and free thought. In terms of how society views “gap years” he stated
that it depends on the generation, because the older generation did not have the same opportunity and
did not travel abroad due to a lack of travel visas. Additionally, being brought up with different values,
will prevent them from understanding the new generation’s perspective. Overall, he feels that younger
people definitely value it, and he sees it as being efficient for your career. He stated that you are “taking
one step back and two steps forward.” Overall, family and friends were very supportive towards him.
The majority of his friends had also completed gap years. His boss and colleagues were also very
understanding of his situation. He claims that it is very common in Germany (may be a societal thing).
He advises others to have the courage to take the gap year, and use it to find “your position in the
world.” It is important to “find something that takes you out of your comfort zone”, and advises people
to do something different from what people are telling them to do. He finds that taking on challenges
 Silva 42
helps you grow as a person, and companies need more creative individuals. Finally, when asked what he
would tell his past self about “gap years”, he said he would tell himself to “really research companies
and speak to the boss in order to find something that will truly help you.”
HR Department Manager Perceptions on Gap Years
Participant #7
(HR Manager for the benefits department of Global/Logistics Company)
Participant #7 works in the Human Resource Department for a global/logistics company,
specifically in the benefits department area. She is also co-owner of a catering business that her
husband started, and is primarily responsible for the hiring of the workers in his business. When it
comes to seeing a gap year on a person’s resume, she typically views it as a red flag that needs to be
further addressed. She needs to understand more why the person decided to take the gap year.
According to her it “isn’t the gap year per say, it’s more about what you were doing during the time.”
Her children and some of her closer friends have taken gap years previously, so she is far more
sympathetic to the cause because she understands that there might be many reasons for the gap year
that are not present within the individuals resume. It ultimately might be a topic of discussion at the
interview in order to discuss the gap in the resume. When it comes to actually placing your separate
experiences on a resume, she feels the recruiter can either see it in a positive or negative light
depending on their viewpoint and separate experiences. Due to her familiarity with gap years and her
love for other cultures and different experiences, she would ultimately see those “separate experiences”
as something very valuable because it showcases the individual’s overall character and personality. It is
also something that the interviewer and interviewee can bond over during the interview. She described
her daughter’s experience studying abroad in Porto, Portugal during a gap year, and how much it
ultimately helped her become a more independent and capable person. It had done wonders for her,
and made her succeed in many other areas of her life. She feels that a lot of her success at the
University of Georgia is connected to the growth she experienced while studying abroad in Portugal.
Additionally, her son is married to a woman from Taiwan and her neighbors are Japanese. Being
surrounded by different cultures and ways of thinking has opened her perspective, which has also
translated to her views on gap years in general. Everyone has different experiences in life, so it is
important to treat each person as an individual and really get to know them during the interview
process before judging their character. When it comes to whether or not a gap year will be seen in a
favorable light, she feels that it is very subjective on the part of the recruiter and their individual
experiences. A younger recruiter with similar experiences will undoubtedly see it differently than an
older individual from a generation where gap year opportunities were near non-existent. On this topic,
she explained an experience she had with an older previous boss of hers, where he was proud to have
not left the United States. He generally had no interest in leaving the country, and did not understand
why others would even consider taking a gap year to work or study abroad. When it comes to the topic
of newer generations changing jobs more frequently, she found that in the past company’s would be
able to hold on to their employees for a longer period of time, because of the pensions they would
provide which would require that the employee stay there for an extended period of time. This is not
the case anymore, which allows individuals to try out different experiences and work without the fear of
missing out on certain long-term benefits. When it comes to whether or not she feels a gap year would
better help an individual understand their career goals and objectives, Participant #7 feels that it is
 Silva 43
immensely important because once you are already in a career it is very difficult to have those
experiences. Additionally, just like in the case of her daughter, it can help you really grow as a person
and better understand how to deal with other cultures and people. Finally, she would advise to do a gap
year because it is important for personal growth. “It is important to open yourself to new cultures and
ideas. It is important to be your authentic self and interview the employer while you’re being
interviewed in order to see if the job is a good fit for you.”
Participant #8
(HR manager for Recruiting Agency)
Participant #8 works as an HR Manager for an executive recruiting agency. It is an executive
search firm that is responsible for assisting companies (from small to fortune 500 sized) in order to find
and retain top executives for leadership positions. When it comes to the recruitment process for the
company, according to Participant #8 the client tells the company that they need a CEO and they are
responsible for trying to find the right candidate to fit the position. When it comes to having a gap year
on an individual’s resume, she thinks it is fine to have a year that deviates from the core principles of the
job, as long as you are making career progression. It is important that you do your best to connect your
experiences as something constructive that can help the company. When it comes to including specific
outside experiences on a resume, as a recruiter for executive positions, she recommends that all workrelated experiences be provided in order to complete an extensive background check on the individual.
She feels that overall, a lengthier resume with your accomplishments and experience is always more
beneficial than omitting information. She feels that it is important that the candidate asks a lot of
questions about what the job/position entails to make sure that it is a good fit for them. When it comes
to including “separate experiences” on a resume, as a recruiter for more executive positions, she does
not feel that it is very important. However, when a college student is starting out, they do not have a lot
of work experience, and those separate experiences can help them stand out from other applicants.
When it comes to taking a gap year for personal growth, she feels that it really depends on what they
are doing for themselves. If it connects to your career progression it can be helpful. She feels it might be
better to simply work a position during that year whether an internship or job in order to gain valuable
practical experience and learn more about what you want out of your career. There are certain
companies, such as GE, that offer multiple positions and allow you to grow by moving around different
departments. She highlights that doing this would be a strong and probably better alternative to taking a
gap year that is not job related (especially post-graduation). When it comes to advice she would give to
a person considering taking a “gap year”, she ultimately would advise against the decision if you are not
planning on making personal and career related growth. She feels it is better to have more direct job
experience so you don’t fall behind other candidates. As she stated, “It is better to not fall into a
disadvantaged state before applying for a position.” It is important for the candidate to think about their
career prospects and not waste valuable time.
Participant #9
(HR Manager for Software Engineering Company)
 Silva 44
Participant #9 is a human resource director for a Software Engineering Company for the past 20
years. It’s an IT company that does various different services for computer programs and applications.
She works in the areas of recruitment, benefits programs, and terminations. When looking at a resume,
she has to look at the criteria for the specific position, and to see what qualifications are necessary to
meet the criteria. She also generally posts on Indeed.com for recruitment purposes. She looks for people
with the right qualifications and characteristics that meet the intended job criteria. When it comes to a
gap year, she finds that it is best to not “assume why the individual took the gap year.” It is something
that would catch her attention, and she would usually dig a bit deeper to see the reasoning behind the
gap year in the resume. She has had many experiences interviewing individuals who were stay-at-home
parents, who have not been in the workforce for more than 10 years. She finds that it is important to
keep an open-mind because everyone’s experiences and circumstances in life are different. She also
waits to see if the applicant decides to mention the gap year in the interview. She finds it important that
the individual is able to explain the reason for the gap, to show that they were doing something
productive/meaningful in their life. According to her, she would “rather see an individual utilizing a
meaningful gap year, than just jumping around through random jobs for a short period of time.” If the
individual is switching between jobs often, she will begin to question if the person experienced
problems at other jobs, and quits often or was fired from them. Over time, there hasn’t been too much
of a difference in the amount of gap years she has seen on people’s resumes. However, she does state it
might be more of a cultural phenomenon because Americans typically have a more “work mentality”,
and are always looking to show that they are being productive. She also states that there are
generational differences in the overall viewpoint, and that the younger generation is overall more
accepting of the idea of taking a gap year. This can also have an influence on how a recruiter views your
resume. If the recruiter is older, he/she might only see the “gap year” as a waste of time; while a
younger recruiter may be more understanding of the situation. At the end of the day, recruitment is a
bit subjective, and the personal experiences and viewpoints of the recruiter will influence who they
decide to hire. When it comes to whether or not an individual should put their separate gap year
experiences on the resume, Participant #9 felt that it would be best to have your resume tailored for the
job that you are applying for. However, she still feels that it is important to keep a separate document
with information on separate things you were doing, in order to show that you are a well-rounded
candidate and can explain for the gaps in your resume. When it comes to whether or not a gap year
could be beneficial to showcase a more well-rounded candidate, Participant #9 feels that it really
depends on what the person is doing. But, more times than not it will probably not have much of an
impact on the hiring process. On the topic of whether or not a gap year can help a person sort out their
career goals and objectives, she feels it is really up to the person on how it will ultimately shape them. It
might be important in order to change into an industry that is more purposeful for them. It can
ultimately be beneficial if they are doing something constructive for their life. Finally, when it comes to
the decision of taking a gap year, she feels that it depends on the way that you plan out your gap year.
You should create a time frame in order to better stay on track of your goals and objectives. Taking off
an indefinite amount of time could become problematic because you begin losing that cohesive
planning structure, and will ultimately use some of the time wastefully. She also finds that employers
want to see that an individual is committed to the company and their work. Wasting a considerable
amount of time taking several gap years could ultimately raise a red flag for employers that you lack a
serious work ethic.
 Silva 45
 